REP: 151
Title: Python 3 Support
Author: Dirk Thomas
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 23-Dec-2017

Outline
=======

#. Abstract_
#. Motivation_
#. Rationale_
#. Proposals_
#. Rosdep_
#. Conclusion_
#. References_
#. Copyright_

Abstract
========

This REP describes the path for switching from Python 2 to Python 3 in ROS 1.

Motivation
==========

As described in the Python release schedule [1]_ Python 2.7 will only receive
bugfix releases until 2020.
As a consequence Ubuntu is trying to demote Python 2.7 into the `universe`
repository for 18.04 since they don't want to guarantee support for 5 years.
While it is unlikely that Python 2.7 will be removed from the archives entirely
it should not be relied on past its EOL date.
Therefore ROS 1 needs to begin moving to Python 3 in order to make the
transition as smooth as possible.

Rationale
=========

The goal for a future ROS 1 distribution to support Python 3 should be achieved
no later than for ROS O-turtle (May 2020).
Since O-turtle is a LTS release it is strongly desired to already support
Python 3 in the non-LTS release N-turtle to allow enough "soak" time.

In general a single Python version must be used since different versions can't
be mixed within a single ROS distribution.
E.g. a package `A` using Python 3 can't use the Python modules from package `B`
if that was built with/for Python 2.

In order to support Python 3 it is mandatory that the testing infrastructure
(namely `devel` and `PR` jobs) can run the build and tests with Python 3.
Since each of these jobs require Debian packages of the dependencies to be
present being able to test for a specific Python version requires Debian
packages for this Python version to be present.
The alternative of building all dependencies from-source in these jobs doesn't
scale and is therefore not feasible since the time necessary for a single build
gets increasingly high the further up in the stack the package is.

Updating all ROS packages which contain Python code to support Python 2
as well as 3 is a significant effort.
Therefore it is expected that this will take a while and will require the ROS
community to share the necessary workload.

Proposals
=========

Neither of the proposals specifies a specific minimum minor version for Python
3 support but focuses on the general effort to transition to Python 3.
The minimum version is being defined in REP 3 [2]_ together with all other
versions.

A) Transition over multiple releases (separate debs for other Python)
---------------------------------------------------------------------

The goals of this proposal are to provide early feedback for Python 3 related
problems by providing parallel testing capabilities.
The following timeline describes a transition over multiple ROS releases:

 * ROS O-turtle (May 2020, LTS):

   * The only Debian packages provided are using Python 3.
   * From-source builds are using Python 3 by default.
   * All ROS packages should support Python 3.
   * Python 2 support is not required anymore.

 * ROS N-turtle (May 2019):

   * The set of recommended Debian packages is using Python 3.
   * There is an alternative set of Debian packages which is using Python 2,
     this can be used in case some packages don't support Python 3 yet.
     These two sets of Debian packages should be side-by-side installable in
     order to ease testing.
   * From-source builds are using Python 3 by default, optionally choosing
     Python 2 should be possible for all packages.
   * All ROS packages should support Python 2 as well as Python 3.

 * ROS Melodic (May 2018, LTS):

   * The set of recommended Debian packages is using Python 2.
   * There is an alternative set of Debian packages which is using Python 3,
     this can be used by the CI infrastructure as well as users choosing to use
     Python 3.
   * From-source builds are using Python 2 by default, optionally choosing
     Python 3 should be possible.
   * All ROS packages should support Python 2 while support for Python 3 is
     recommended (as it has been for the past ROS distributions).

Requirements
''''''''''''

To support the proposal `A)` a few capabilities have to be developed:

 * `catkin` / `catkin_tools` need to support choosing the Python version.

 * `rosdep`: choose between Python 2 and Python 3 dependencies; see the Rosdep_
    section for more information.

 * `bloom` needs to generate releases for both Python versions in parallel.
   The user should only need to release each package once.

 * `ros_buildfarm` needs to provide jobs for both Python versions in parallel.

 * Across all ROS packages which contain Python code it needs to be ensured
   that they support both major Python versions.
   In the majority of the cases this can be easily achieved, some examples how
   to convert Python 2-only code to work for both major versions can be found
   in the ROS wiki [4]_.

B) Transition from one release to the next
------------------------------------------

This proposal minimizes the effort necessary on the infrastructure and tooling
side.
Instead of supporting both Python versions in parallel the only supported
Python version changes from one release to the next:

 * ROS O-turtle (May 2020, LTS):

   * The Debian packages as well as the infrastructure and tools only support
     Python 3.

 * ROS N-turtle (May 2019):

   * The Debian packages as well as the infrastructure and tools only support
     Python 3.
   * To maximize the testing time the buildfarm should be provided as early as
     possible (around November 2018 once the first Ubuntu 19.04 packages are
     available).
   * The downside of this is that N-turtle will target the same Ubuntu LTS
     18.04 which makes it more difficult to choose the "right" `rosdep`
     mapping.
     The effort is not higher than for proposal `A)` though.
     An alternative would be to keep using Python 2 in N-turtle and only switch
     to Python 3 in O-turtle but that would imply a drastic change in an LTS
     release which doesn't seem to be a good idea.

 * ROS Melodic (May 2018, LTS):

   * The Debian packages as well as the infrastructure and tools only support
     Python 2.
   * It should be made possible to do a from-source build with Python 3 for
     early testing.
   * It is encouraged to make the code base work with both Python version in
     order to ease the upcoming transition.

Requirements
''''''''''''

To support the proposal `B)` less effort is necessary compared to proposal
`A)`:

 * `rosdep`: choose between Python 2 and Python 3 dependencies; see the Rosdep_
    section for more information.

 * `bloom` needs to generate releases for both Python versions in parallel.
   The user should only need to release each package once.

 * `ros_buildfarm` needs to provide jobs for both Python versions in parallel.

 * ROS packages don't have to support both Python versions in parallel but they
   all have to switch to Python 3 for the same release.
   While the effort is slightly lower than to support both Python versions
   simultaneously the transition window is rather short.

C) Transition over multiple releases (single set of bilingual debs)
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Similar goals and timeline to proposal `A)`, but with only a single set of
installable debs, significantly lowering the complexity barrier for users and
package deveopers/maintainers.

The concept is that each installed package which supplies Python modules will be
able to migrate to dual Python 2/3 support during ROS Melodic, such that leaf
Python packages are able to opt into Python 3 any time during Melodic or
N-Turtle, whenever their dependencies are ready to go.

This proposal offers flexibility to users, with the primary costs being the risk
of user confusion or side effects around the "alternative python" shim, and the
cost of dual-depending on all Python dependencies, which may frustrate users
with limited disk who would prefer not to have both `python-numpy` and
`python3-numpy` installed unncessarily.

The following timeline describes a transition over multiple ROS releases:

 * ROS O-turtle (May 2020, LTS):

   * Debian packages using catkin_setup_python install to
     `lib/python3/dist-packages/`.
   * From-source builds use Python 3 by default.
   * All ROS packages should support Python 3.

 * ROS N-turtle (May 2019):

   * Debian packages using catkin_setup_python install to both
     `lib/python3/dist-packages/` and `lib/python2.7/dist-packages/`
   * Default behaviour of `catkin_install_python` (with an ambiguous
     `usr/bin/env python` shebang) is to use Python 3. Users may choose
     explicitly a `python2` or `python3` shebang, as desired.
   * From-source builds are using Python 3 by default; users may choose
     instead Python 2 or to use the dual-build behaviour.

 * ROS Melodic (May 2018, LTS):

   * Debian packages using catkin_setup_python install to both
     `lib/python3/dist-packages/` and `lib/python2.7/dist-packages/`
   * Default behaviour of `catkin_install_python` (with an ambiguous
     `usr/bin/env python` shebang) is to use Python 2. Users may choose
     explicitly a `python2` or `python3` shebang, as desired.
   * From-source builds are using Python 2 by default; users may choose
     instead Python 3 or to use the dual-build behaviour.

Requirements
''''''''''''

To support the proposal `C)` a few capabilities must be developed in catkin:

 * It will need to be updated with bilingual awareness around the
   `catkin_install_python` and `catkin_python_setup` functions.

 * The existing `PYTHON_EXECUTABLE`, `PYTHON_LIBRARY`, and `PYTHON_INCLUDE_DIR`
   variables which may be used today to select the preferred Python will need to
   be supplemented by a separate `PYTHON_ALT_*` vars which control which Python
   is used for the second `setup.py` invocation. If the `PYTHON_ALT_*` vars are
   unset, catkin will build only for the default Python (this would be default
   behaviour in a source workspace, in order to not break Arch and other
   from-source systems where `/usr/bin/python` is already Python 3).

 * Similarly, Python nosetests will run twice if the `PYTHON_ALT_*` vars are
   set. Perhaps a CMake function could be used to disable this behaviour,
   especially for packages which migrate to Python 3 and don't want to receive
   test failures for Python 2 issues. For example,
   `catkin_python_policy(ONLY_3)` or similar.

 * In order to do the right thing with conventional `/usr/bin/env python3`
   shebangs, ROS Melodic will need to ship a small wrapper shim which mutates
   the `PYTHONPATH` variable. This shim would live at
   `/opt/ros/melodic/bin/python3` and look like
   ```
   #!/bin/sh
   PYTHONPATH=$(echo $PYTHONPATH | sed "s/lib\/python2\.7/lib\/python3/")
   /usr/bin/python3 $*
   ```
   Similarly, ROS N-Turtle would have to do the reverse operation in a `python2`
   shim. No shim would be required for ROS O-Turtle and beyond. This shim could
   be part of the `catkin` package itself, or potentially live separately.

And in other tools:

 * `rosdep`: choose between Python 2 and Python 3 dependencies; see the Rosdep_
    section for more information.

 * `bloom`: For the transitional releases (N and M), the default bloom behaviour
   will be to depend on both the Python 2 and Python 3 versions of all Python
   dependencies.

 * `ros_buildfarm` should set the new `PYTHON_ALT_*` vars according to the
   release plan given above.

 * Packages which generate compiled Python extensions will require bespoke CMake
   logic to ensure that these extensions are correctly built and installed
   twice. Upon examining the individual cases, it's possible that the `catkin`
   package may be able to provide some tooling to streamline this.

Rosdep
======

To support any of the proposals above, rosdep must be updated to allow either
Python 2 or Python 3 keys.

Multiple different options can be considered for this:

 #. Beside the `python.yaml` file create a `python3.yaml` file and let
    `rosdep` choose between them.
 #. Use different installers for Python 2 and Python 3 packages, e.g. `xenial`
    and `xenial_python3`, and let `rosdep` choose between them.
 #. Create explicit rosdep keys with a `python2` and `python3` prefix and use
    them in the package manifest files with conditional dependencies as
    specified in REP 149 [3]_.
 #. A combination of 1. and 3., where the default dependency resolution for
    rosdep depends on the ROS distribution in use, with an environment variable
    to let users manually control it.  For instance, for a rosdep key of
    `python-foo`, there would be an entry in `python.yaml` that resolves to
    `python-foo` on Ubuntu, and an entry in `python3.yaml` that resolves to
    `python3-foo` on Ubuntu.  On Melodic, rosdep would resolve dependencies
    using the `python.yaml` file by default.  An environment variable called
    `ROS_PYTHON_VERSION` would allow the user to force the use of `python3.yaml`
    for dependency resolution for testing (though this requires a removal and
    re-initialization of the entire rosdep database).  On N-Turtle, this would
    be reversed and rosdep would resolve dependencies using the `python3.yaml`
    file by default.  Additionally, there may be keys called `python2-foo` and
    `python3-foo` that would allow package maintainers to support Python 2 and
    Python 3 simultaneously in their package by utilizing conditional
    dependencies in package format 3 [3]_.

Conclusion
==========

While proposal `A)` provides a smoother transition it requires a significantly
higher development effort.
Proposal `B)` requires the least tooling effort, but will be the roughest on the
community, offering little in the way of a migration plan.
Proposal `C)` also provides a smooth transition, but also requires significantly
higher development effort.

Since there are limited resources available to fix the tooling, Proposal B) will
be chosen and implemented.

References
==========

.. [1] PEP 373 Python 2.7 Release Schedule
   (https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0373/)
.. [2] REP-0003 Target Platforms
   (http://ros.org/reps/rep-0003)
.. [3] REP-0149 Package Manifest Format Three Specification
   (http://ros.org/reps/rep-0149)
.. [4] ROS Wiki - Python 2 and 3 compatible code
   (http://wiki.ros.org/python_2_and_3_compatible_code)

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.

..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
