REP: 100
Title: ROS Stack Separation
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: Tully Foote <tfoote@willowgarage.com>, Ken Conley <kwc@willowgarage.com>, Brian Gerkey <gerkey@willowgarage.com>
Status: Final
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 18-Sep-2010
Post-History: 18-Sep-2010, 20-Oct-2010, 20-Nov-2010


Abstract
========

The monolithic ROS stack, as released in ROS 1.0 and ROS 1.2, is being
separated into several, smaller stacks: ros, ros_comm, rx, and
documentation. These smaller stacks will enable installation on more
platforms, better decoupling of design, and easier release. It is also
hoped that the base ros stack, which will contain the packaging and
build system, will be useful in other software projects that don't
make use of the ROS communication system.

Specification
=============

New packages are marked with an asterisk \*.

ros stack
---------

- mk
- rosbash
- rosbuild
- rosboost_cfg
- rosclean
- roscreate
- rosdep
- rosemacs
- roslib
- rospack
- rosmake
- rosunit*

ros_comm stack
--------------

ROS client libraries

- roslang
- rospy
- roslisp
- roscpp
- roscpp_serialization*
- roscpp_traits*
- rostime*

ROS graph tools

- rosbag
- rosbagmigration
- rosconsole
- rosgraph
- roslaunch
- rosmsg
- rosmaster
- rosnode
- rosout
- rosparam
- rosrecord
- rosservice
- rostest
- rostopic
- topic_tools

ROS core ontology

- roscore_migration_rules
- rosgraph_msgs*
- std_msgs
- std_srvs

Libraries and Utilities

- message_filters
- roswtf
- xmlrpcpp

ros_release stack
-----------------

ros_release is an existing ROS stack used to for libraries and scripts
related to releasing and installing ROS stacks.  Two Python modules
from roslib will be moved into it as new packages.

- rosdistro*
- vcstools*


rx stack
--------

The rx stack contains GUI-related tools for ROS, which are generally
wxWindows-based. The 'rx' prefix is commonly used to denote ROS tools
that provide a graphical user interface.

- rxbag
- rxdeps
- rxgraph
- rxtools
- wxPython_swig_interface
- wxswig
- xdot

documentation stack
-------------------

- rosdoc

The documentation stack will only contain the rosdoc codebase in the
initial release.  Work is currently being done on rosdoc to separate
it into a plugin-based model so that specific documentation
capabilities can be added or removed as needed.  For example,
documentation needs for ROS.org are being moved into the rosdoc_rosorg
package and will migrate to another stack. This work is independent of
this REP.

Deleted Packages
----------------

The following packages will be removed as part of this separation. The
rosrecord package was superceded by rosbag in ROS 1.2. The genmsg_cpp
stack is being removed in favor of Python-based message
generators. This is discussed further in the backward compatibility
section.

- genmsg_cpp
- gtest

Header, Clock, and Log
----------------------

Header will be moved from roslib into the std_msgs package.

Clock, and Log will be moved from the roslib package to the
rosgraph_msgs package.

For backwards compatibility, the generated source
code files for these messages will be released with the roslib package
in ROS 1.4 but marked as deprecated.

Moving roslib C++ libraries
---------------------------

roscpp makes use of several header and cpp files in roslib.  These
will be moved into new packages within the ros_comm stack.

- roscpp_traits
- roscpp_serialization
- rostime

These packages use the generic 'ros' namespace, so the expected impact
on existing packages is expected to be minor.

Moving roslib python modules
----------------------------

Several roslib python modules will be moved to rosgraph and elsewhere. 

The following modules will be moved to rosgraph:

- roslib.genpy
- roslib.gentools
- roslib.message
- roslib.msgs
- roslib.network
- roslib.rostime
- roslib.srvs
- roslib.xmlrpc

The following modules will be moved to rosdistro (new package):

- roslib.distro

The following modules will be moved to vcstools (new package):

- roslib.vcs

The following modules will be heavily refactored:

- roslib.scriptutil

The following modules will be removed (already deprecated):

- roslib.masterapi

rosunit
-------

The main role of rosunit is to replace the bare test functionality of
rostest.  The bare test function wraps unit tests when they are
executed and adds a configurable timeout.  It also produces an Ant
JUnit XML file from the results.  This functionality is generally
useful in the ROS build system and is also necessary to run unit tests
on the ros stack.

The rosunit package will get the following resources from rostest:

- ``rostest/bin/cleanunit``
- ``rostest/bin/test-results-dirs``
- ``rostest/bin/coverage-html``
- ``rostest/bin/rostest-check-results``

These scripts are used internally by build tools and do not have high
visibility. They will be given newer, more descriptive names after the
move.

The following script will be refactored, with some of its required
routines moved to rosunit:

- ``rostest/src/rostest/rostestutil.py``

rosbuild
--------

rosbuild will be converted to use scripts moved to the rosunit package.

For scripts that currently cannot be moved to the rosunit package
(e.g. rostest itself), the behaviors are defined below.

``rosbuild_add_roslaunch_check()``: this macro requires use of the
roslaunch-check.py. This script will be moved to the roslaunch
package, which remains with the ros_comm stack. To minimize impact on
existing packages, rosbuild will continue to provide the
``rosbuild_add_roslaunch_check()`` macro, but it will throw an error if it
cannot find roslaunch.

There is more discussion of these issues, see `rosbuild testing
features`.


$ROS_ROOT/bin executables
-------------------------

All executables, unless otherwise marked for removal, currently in
$ROS_ROOT/bin will remain there.  Binary executables will be converted
to bash scripts using rosrun.

Motivation
==========

Several main motivations have been identified for this separation

- Making the "core" ROS lighter weight, which enables
  - Easier porting to other platforms
  - Smaller footprint 
- Enabling projects to use the ROS packaging and build system separate from the communication infrastructure
- Easier maintainability 
- Better decoupling of design interests between the packaging and communication architectures

Rationale
=========

rosbuild testing features
-------------------------

rosbuild explicitly uses the following packages:

- rosbuild
- rospack
- gtest
- roslib
- rostest

The use of rostest is an issue, because rostest will be in the ros_comm
stack, while rosbuild will be in the ros stack.  rosbuild uses the
following tools from rostest:

- (*) ``bin/rostest-check-results``
- (*) ``bin/test-results-dir``
- (*) ``bin/rostest-results``
- (*) ``bin/coverage-html``
- (+) ``bin/roslaunch-check.py``
- (\X) ``bin/rostest``

The tools marked (*) will be moved to the new rosunit package, but the
rest will remain in ros_comm packages.

Options for handling this separation include:

 1. Follow the ``rosbuild_add_roslaunch_check()`` model: leave everything where
    it is, and if ``bin/rostest`` isn't available, throw an error if the user calls
    any of ``rosbuild_add_gtest*()`` or ``rosbuild_add_pyunit*()``.
 2. Separate out the ``bin/rostest --bare`` behavior and put it somewhere lower,
    such as rosunit.

We have chosen to implement Option 2, as it is the better long term
solution. Conceptually, rosunit implements unit testing functionality,
and rostest implements integration testing functionality.  rosunit has
no graph dependencies, though it does make use of the roslaunch
process manager.  This will be resolved in the short term by copying
the process manager out of roslaunch.  In the future, we can envision
an implementation of roslaunch that does not depend on the graph and
could be used as a library for rosunit.


Header, Clock, and Log
----------------------

Three msg IDL files are currently stored in the roslib package as they
are common to all ROS client libraries. The roslib package must go
into the base ros stack as it contains many of the libraries used by
the package and build tools, but we wish to keep the ros stack
decoupled from client libraries issues.

The Clock and Log msg files are not considered to be user facing.
They are also specific to the ROS middleware implementation and would
pollute a more generic ontology like std_msgs.  The designation of a
new rosgraph_msgs package clearly associates these msg files as being
specific to representing state of the ROS graph.  We originally
intended to create a roslang_msgs package, but decided that a
rosgraph_msgs was a better categorization.  In the future, we might
add messages for the ROS Master state and other graph data.

The Header msg file is user facing and will go into std_msgs. It would
be preferable to be able to move the Header msg out of the ROS stacks
entirely, but that is out of scope for this proposal.

The impact of changing the location of these messages requires further
study.  The Header message is generally not referred to as
"roslib/Header", which will hopefully minimize the impact in the ROS
code base, despite it being commonly used. The Clock and Log messages
generally have limited use outside of ROS client libraries
(e.g. simulators, GUI tools), and will hopefully be easy to migrate.

Moving of roslib python modules
-------------------------------

The roslib libraries selected for moving are generally to support ROS
communication. Leaving them in the ros stack would create a coupling
between ros_comm and the ros stack that would make future development
difficult.  Moving of roslib python modules is expected to have low
external impact as these libraries are generally for internal use. It
is expected to have high impact internally as many tool make use of
these representations.

genmsg_cpp deletion
-------------------

The genmsg_cpp package currently lives at the root of the ROS
dependency tree so that it can be compiled before any messages are
generated. This design causes many problems, though the main one of
concern is that it introduces client-library-specific information in
the base ROS stack. In order to meet our goals of decoupling the ROS
packaging system from the ROS communication system, this
implementation artifact needs to be removed. Despite its name,
genmsg_cpp is no longer used for roscpp and only affects roslisp,
rosoct, and rosjava. The effect on these packages is described in the
Backwards Compatibility section.

Client libraries are instead expected to develop Python-based message
generators (e.g. rospy and roscpp) or dynamically convert the msg IDL
to code (e.g. roslua).

documentation stack
-------------------

The placement of the rosdoc package was considered for both the ros
and documentation stacks. The rosdoc tool is a generally useful tool
as it provides a mechanism for auto-generating documentation across a
ROS-package-based code base. Comparison to similar tools, like
javadoc, shows that these documentation tools are generally
distributed with the main system.

Thus, moving the rosdoc package to its own, separate "documentation"
stack does generate problems from a user perspective. In particular,
they may be confused that it is missing from the ros stack. This
concern is balanced by multiple motivations:

- rosdoc has heavy-weight dependencies (rxdeps, graphviz, doxygen,
  sphinx, latex).
- Future implementations of rosdoc will likely break it into multiple
  packages in a plugin model (e.g. rosdoc_sphinx, rosdoc_rosorg,
  etc...).
- The ROS Distribution system and packaging system can provide the
  documentation stack in common configurations.

Keeping $ROS_ROOT/bin executables
---------------------------------

The inclusion of ros_comm and rx executables with the ros stack is
unfortunate.  It does not significantly increase the size of the ros
stack as binary executables will be replaced with bash scripts, but it
does add non-functioning executables to a bare ros installation.

Our debian package system does not allow another ROS stack to build
into $ROS_ROOT/bin.  Work on a ROS install target (REP 102 [#REP102]_)
will hopefully provide a clean solution in the future.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This separation is expected to break the existing, experimental rosoct
and rosjava libraries due to the removal of the genmsg_cpp removal.

The roslisp message generator is currently implemented in genmsg_cpp,
but is in the process of being converted to the Python-based approach.

For additional backwards compatibility, libraries for msg handling as
well as core msg types (Header, Log, and Clock) will be left in the
roslib package for the ROS 1.4 release. These will be marked as
deprecated and removed in the ROS 1.5 release.

Scheduling
==========

Early planning and cleanup for this separation went into the ROS 1.2
release, including rewriting the roscpp message generator in
Python. For the ROS 1.4 release, the rx and documentation stacks are
expected to be cleanly separated. For reasons discussed above, clean
separation of the ros and ros_comm stacks are not expected for the ROS
1.4 release. In particular, the changes related to 'moving of roslib
Python modules' is not expected to be fully completed by the ROS 1.4
release due to the difficulty in moving and renaming Python modules.

All preference will be given to maintaining a stable system over the
separation. Although it is desirable to have a perfectly clean
separation, the majority of our design goals even if this is not
achieved in the ROS 1.4 release.

References
==========

.. [#REP102] REP 102
   (http://ros.org/reps/rep-0102.html)


Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.



..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
