REP: 141
Title: ROS distribution files
Author: Dirk Thomas
Status: Final
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 18-Dec-2013
Post-History: 18-Dec-2013

.. contents::

Abstract
========
This REP specifies a set of files which define ROS distributions and
facilitate the building, packaging, testing and documenting process.
The intention is to formalize the existing infrastructure and simplify hosting
of (potentially customized) ROS buildfarms.
This REP is a revised version of REP 137 [6]_.

Motivation
==========
A ROS distribution consists of numerous software packages maintained by various
contributors forming a coherent set. Until now there was
only one buildfarm responsible for running unit tests and generating Debian
packages for various Ubuntu versions and no formal description of the semantics
of the files used in that process was given so far. Expanding the
current capabilities to support other platforms and architectures will be
important extensions.

This REP aims to specify all information and file formats necessary to release
and package ROS distributions for various platforms and architectures. By
formalizing these data structures it should be enabled to:

* release packages using bloom [1]_ for all targeted platforms
* build binary packages for selected platforms and architectures
* run unit tests on selected platforms and architectures
* generation documentation

The use cases this REP is designed to address are:

1. simplify the setup of a buildfarm which builds, tests and documents a ROS distribution,
   i.e. building, testing and documenting individual ROS distributions on separate buildfarms
2. enable building binary packages for (experimental) platforms and
   architectures
3. enable building binary packages of custom packages on top of the existing ROS
   distributions for publicly or privately hosted projects

Design requirements
===================
The information formalized in this REP is used in five separate processes:

* releasing a package
  (This is the process of exporting upstream source and generating platform
  specific build files specific meta-information)
* building binary packages for a specific platform and architecture
* running automated tests
* running documentation jobs
* checking out packages/repositories and their recursive dependencies from
  release repositories as well as source repositories

There should be a single configuration which contains (or references) all
information required to run the above processes.
The configuration must be easily readable and editable by both humans as well
as machines and be extendable with future functionality.

The set of packages for which to build binary packages must be configurable
for each platform and architecture.

The release process should stay independent of the build process. The testing
can be performed on either the upstream source or on the released tarball
(depending on if the upstream source contains enough information to run the
test suite). The build process can only work on released packages.

Each configuration file must contain a label which identifies the semantics
of the file as well as a version number to enable future format updates.

It must be possible to unambiguously correlate source and release
repositories of the same packages.

Rationale
=========
A single configuration containing or referencing all required information
allows for a single entry point for automated processing in the above
mentioned processes.

Specifying individual subsets of packages per platform and architecture is
necessary since not all released packages can and should be build on all
platforms and architectures.

The information for the various processes could be separated from each other
to ease customizing individual processes. But then it would not be reliably
possible to correlate entries from different processes. E.g. a released repo
can not be unambiguously correlated to a source repository. Especially for
tools like rosinstall_generator this would be valuable in order to enable
certain features.

Specification
=============

This REP gives a formal specification for the files that are used for that.
Currently the information about the repositories is stored in three
different files:
* release.yaml
* source.yaml
* doc.yaml

In order to correlate them realiably this information will be stored in a
single distribution.yaml file. For each repository the content from the
separate files is nested under a common repository entry in the new
distribution file.

The subfolder information for each package is being dropped. Since the
location within the repository might be different for release/source/doc
it would need to be maintained separately for each of them. Currently the
package.xml is only fetched for released packages and then it is retrieved
from the known location in the release repository.

The status information is not specific to the release repository anymore
but applies to the source and doc repository as well. This allows for
annotating the status of repositories and packages even if they
are not released.

All current information can be converted into the new format using a script
in the reference implementation.

File format
-----------

Files use YAML 1.1 for the sake of human and machine readability and
write-ability.
As a good practice, the files should contain a header such as:

::

  %YAML 1.1
  # ROS index|distribution|release-build|source-build|doc-build file
  # see REP 141: http://ros.org/reps/rep-0141.html
  ---

Index file
----------
The index file acts as a single configuration entrypoint which lists all
available ROS distributions, along with references pointing to further process
specific information.
The references can be either relative to the index file or absolute.

The information stored in the index file is:

* distributions: a list of ROS distributions

  For each distribution further information are referenced:

  * distribution: reference to the distribution file
  * release_builds: list of references to the release-build files used to build the binary packages
  * release_cache: reference to a release cache. Whether this field is
    a dictionary, a list or a scalar is left as an implementation detail. The
    following examples will assume that the implementation necessitates an url.
  * source_builds: list of references to the source-build files used to run the tests
  * doc_builds: list of references to the doc-build files used to run the documentation

* type: must be 'index'
* version: version number, this REP describes version 2 (instead of version 1
  described in REP 137 [6]_)

Example
-------
An index file referencing multiple distribution with their release, source and
doc files and their corresponding build files.

::

  %YAML 1.1
  # ROS index file
  # see REP 141: http://ros.org/reps/rep-0141.html
  ---
  distributions:
    groovy:
      distribution: groovy/distribution.yaml
      release_builds: [groovy/release-build-ubuntu.yaml, releases/release-build-arm.yaml]
      release_cache: http://www.example.com/groovy-cache
      source_builds: [groovy/source-build.yaml]
      doc_builds: [groovy/doc-build.yaml]
    hydro:
      ...
  type: index
  version: 2

Distribution file
-----------------
A distribution is identified by the code name of the ROS distribution in the index file.
Each distribution file contains the following information:

* repositories: a list of repositories which are identified by unique names

  * release: all release repository related information are nested under this key

    * url: the URL of the release git repository
      The URL must be anonymously readable and (with the appropriate
      credentials) writable.
    * version: version number for which packages are released. This
      can be a tag, branch or hash.
    * packages: an optional list of package names.  If no package is specified,
      one package with the name of the repository is assumed.
    * tags: a dict of tags which can be used by tools like bloom and
      the rosinstall generator, preventing the need for those tools to guess about tags in
      release repositories, e.g. 'release/package/1.2.3' vs 'release/groovy/package/1.2.3-4'.
      This provides a useful future proofing mechanism for tools which use tags in the
      release repository, rather than guessing the format of the tags they can infer them
      directly from the tag templates.

      * *tag_name {release, debian, etc...}*: Format of tags are strings with {template_variables}
        e.g. 'release/groovy/{package}/{version}' A non-exhaustive list of possible template tags:

        * package - name of the package which this release tag corresponds
        * version - full version of the package being released, e.g. 1.2.3-4
        * upstream_version - upstream version of package being released, e.g. 1.2.3
        * debian_distro - target debian distro codename
        * debian_package_name - name of package, with any prefix and sanitized for debian

        The only required tag_name is 'release', others like 'debian' are optional.

  * source: all source repository related information are nested under this key

    * type: the type of SCM in use. Typically 'git', 'svn'...
    * url: the URL of the source repository
      The URL must be anonymously readable.
    * version: For git and hg this is the tag, branch or hash to be checked out.
      For svn the version should not be set since the branch/tag is encoded in the url.

  * doc: all doc repository related information are nested under this key

    * type: the type of SCM in use. Typically 'git', 'svn'...
    * url: the URL of the source repository
      The URL must be anonymously readable.
    * version: For git and hg this is the tag, branch or hash to be checked out.
      For svn the version should not be set since the branch/tag is encoded in the url.
    * blacklist_packages: an optional list of package names which should not
      be documented. (default: [])
    * depends: list of repository names. Other repositories to perform cross
      referencing in the documentation. This is only necessary if the packages
      from the dependent repositories are not released. (default: [])

  * status: defines the status of the packages of the repository. Can be one of
    the following: ``developed``, ``maintained``, ``unmaintained``,
    ``end-of-life``
  * status_description: an optional field describing in a short sentence the
    current status of the repository.  For example detailing the reason
    for EOL and the recommended upgrade path.
  * status_per_package: an optional list of package names.  For each package
    name a dictionary with the following optional keys allows to override the
    status information:

    * status: overrides the repository-wide status
    * status_description: overrides the repository-wide status description

* release_platforms: a dict of target platforms for which packages are released.
  Each key contains the OS name while the value is a list of OS code names.
  These OS names and OS code names are determined by *rospkg.os_detect* [4]_.
  Each target platform will result in a different bloom release.

* type: must be 'distribution'
* version: version number, this REP describes version 1

**Example**: A distribution file listing repositories and the release
platforms. All changes to REP 137 are commented on inline.

::

  %YAML 1.1
  # ROS distribution file
  # see REP 141: http://ros.org/reps/rep-0141.html
  ---
  # prefixed with 'release_' since these are the platforms we release for
  release_platforms:
    debian: [wheezy]
    ubuntu: [precise, quantal, raring]
  repositories:
    catkin:
      # each repo contains the (optional) sections for 'doc', 'release' and 'source'
      doc:
        type: git
        url: https://github.com/ros/catkin.git
        version: groovy-devel
      release:
        tags:
          release: release/hydro/{package}/{version}
        url: https://github.com/ros-gbp/catkin-release.git
        version: 0.5.77-0
      source:
        type: git
        url: https://github.com/ros/catkin.git
        version: groovy-devel
    genmsg:
      doc:
        type: git
        url: https://github.com/ros/genmsg.git
        # specified separately from 'source' since it might use different version
        version: 0.4.23
      release:
        tags:
          release: release/hydro/{package}/{version}
        url: https://github.com/ros-gbp/genmsg-release.git
        version: 0.4.23-0
      source:
        type: git
        url: https://github.com/ros/genmsg.git
        version: hydro-devel
    roscpp_core:
      doc:
        # optional blacklist packages to avoid documentation of these
        blacklist_packages: [test_rostime]
        depends: [genmsg]
        type: git
        url: https://github.com/ros/roscpp_core.git
        version: hydro-devel
      release:
        # the packages are populated by bloom
        # the subfolder is not stored anymore
        packages: [cpp_common, roscpp_core, roscpp_serialization, roscpp_traits, rostime]
        tags:
          release: release/hydro/{package}/{version}
        url: https://github.com/ros-gbp/roscpp_core-release.git
        version: 0.3.16-0
      source:
        # blacklisting packages should be done with CATKIN_IGNORE files
        # rather than in this file to also cover users checking out the repo
        type: git
        url: https://github.com/ros/roscpp_core.git
        version: hydro-devel
      # status also covers 'doc' and 'source' (not only release, e.g. if not even released)
      status: maintained
      status_description: 'Very actively maintained'
      # status can be overridden per package
      status_per_package:
        roscpp_core:
          status: end-of-life
          status_description: 'Metapackage is not necessary anymore'
        rostime:
          status: unmaintained
  type: distribution
  version: 1

Release build file
------------------
A release build file contains the information necessary to build packages of
the packages specified in the release file:

* package_whitelist: a list of package names to build.
  If this is omitted all packages specified in the release part of the
  distribution file are built.
  Any upstream packages are implicitly included.
* package_blacklist: a list of package names excluded from build.
  If this is omitted no packages are excluded.
  Any downstream package are implicitly excluded.
  The blacklist overrides the whitelist.

* notifications: An optional section to configure email notifications.

  * emails: a list of email addresses to which to send all notification emails. (default: empty)
  * maintainers: a boolean flag used to enable email notification to listed maintainers. (default: false)
  * committers: a boolean flag used to enable email notification to committers. (default: false)

* targets: a nested dict of targets for which packages are built.
  The first level key contains the OS name.
  The second level key contains the OS code name.
  The third level key contains the CPU architecture.
  The OS names and OS code names specified must be listed as a release
  platform in the corresponding distribution file.
  Each level can contain a key `_config` which can contain a dict with arbitrary data.
  These configurations can be used to specify target specific information
  (e.g. `apt_target_repository` or `yum_repository`).
* jenkins_url: the url to the associated Jenkins master
* jenkins_sourcedeb_job_timeout: the timeout in minutes for the sourcedeb jobs (optional).
* jenkins_binarydeb_job_timeout: the timeout in minutes for the binarydeb jobs (optional).
* sync: specify the criteria that need to be fulfilled for packages to be synced.
  Any of the following options can be set and all of them must be fulfilled:

  * package_count: integer. Specifies how many packages need to be successfully built to
    perform a sync. (default: 0)
  * packages: list of package names. All the packages of this list must be successfully built to
    perform a sync. (default: [])

* type: must be 'release-build'
* version: version number, this REP describes version 1, since the
  specification is the same as in REP 137

**Example**: A build file selecting a subset of packages from the release
part of a distribution file and specifying the platforms and architectures.

::

  %YAML 1.1
  # ROS release-build file
  # see REP 141: http://ros.org/reps/rep-0141.html
  ---
  package_whitelist: [ros_tutorials, common_tutorials]
  package_blacklist: [turtlesim]
  notifications:
    emails: [buildfarm-admin@example.com]
    maintainers: true
    committers: false
  targets:
    _config:
      apt_target_repository: http://archives.example.com/ros
      apt_mirrors: [http://archives.example.com/ros, http://packages.foo.org/repos/example]
    ubuntu:
      oneiric:
        amd64:
        i386:
      precise:
        amd64:
        i386:
        armel:
  jenkins_url: http://jenkins.example.com:8080
  sync:
    packages: [ros_tutorials]
  type: release-build
  version: 1

Release cache file
------------------
Collection of all meta information of the ROS distribution, including all the information from the package.xml files.
The cache must reference the release file and store a hash of the release file it was build from to be able to detect if the cache is invalid.
The format of that cache is considered an implementation detail and is not specified in this REP.

Source build file
-----------------
The source build file uses a specification similar to the release build file, but does not
have sync information.
Also the white- and blacklist is on a repository level and does not consider
any kind of dependencies.

* repository_whitelist: a list of repository names to build.
  If this is omitted all repositories specified in the source part of the
  distribution file are built.
* repository_blacklist: a list of repository names excluded from build.
  If this is omitted no repositories are excluded.
  The blacklist overrides the whitelist.

* notifications: as specified for the release build file.

* targets: as specified for the release build file.
* jenkins_url: as specified for the release build file.
* jenkins_job_timeout: the timeout in minutes for each job (optional).

* type: must be 'source-build'
* version: version number, this REP describes version 1, since the
  specification is the same as in REP 137

Documentation build file
------------------------
The documentation build file uses a specification similar to the source build file.

* repository_whitelist: a list of repository names to build.
  If this is omitted all repositories specified in the doc part of the
  distribution file are built.
* repository_blacklist: a list of repository names excluded from build.
  If this is omitted no repositories are excluded.
  The blacklist overrides the whitelist.

* notifications: as specified for the source build file.

* targets: as specified for the source build file. But the list of targets
  must only have one entry.
* jenkins_url: as specified for the source build file.
* jenkins_job_timeout: the timeout in minutes for each job (optional).

* doc_tag_index_repository: a repository storing the tag index

  * type: the type of SCM in use. Must be 'git'
  * url: the URL of the release git repository
    The URL must be writable (with the appropriate credentials).
  * version: This is the branch to be checked out and committed to.

* type: must be 'doc-build'
* version: version number, this REP describes version 1, since the
  specification is the same as in REP 137

Reference implementation
------------------------
This REP is to be implemented in version 0.3 of the Python module *rosdistro*.
This module will serve as a reference implementation for this REP. Any ROS
tool requesting information defined in this REP should use this reference API
implementation.

Compatibility issues
====================

To leverage the new file format additional API will be introduced (e.g.
'rosdistro.get_distribution_file()'). The existing API to access the
previously separated release/source/doc repositories will still be available
and return the information from the new distribution file.

As soon as the new version of 'rosdistro' is released the 'ros/rosdistro'
repository [7]_ is being updated to the new format (for Groovy and higher).
Any client accessing trying to access the data with an old 'rosdistro'
version will get an error message like this:

::

  Unable to handle 'index' format version '1', please update rosdistro

Affected tools
--------------

For all tools it must be ensured that the used API of rosdistro (even if
deprecated) is still working flawlessly:

* bloom [1]_
* buildfarm
* jenkins_scripts
* jenkins_tools
* prerelease_website
* rosdep [2]_
* rosinstall_gen
* rosinstall_generator
* roslocate [3]_

After this REP has been deployed 'rosinstall_generator' can be modified to
enable not only checking out released packages but also source repositories.

The other tools should be updated in the future to use the newly introduced
rather then the deprecated API. After some migration period the deprecated
API might be removed from 'rosdistro'.

Use case examples
=================
A complete example for a ROS distribution called *foo* with all the above
specified files can be found at [5]_.

References
==========
.. [1] Bloom: a release automation tool
   (http://www.ros.org/wiki/bloom)
.. [2] rosdep2: http://ros.org/reps/rep-0125.html
.. [3] roslocate: http://www.ros.org/reps/rep-0115.html
.. [4] rospkg.os_detect: http://www.ros.org/reps/rep-0114.html
.. [5] Example files specifying a ROS distro: https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rosdistro/tree/master/test/files
.. [6] REP 137: http://www.ros.org/reps/rep-0137.html
.. [7] rosdistro repository: https://github.com/ros/rosdistro

Copyright
=========
This document has been placed in the public domain.
