REP: 113
Title: ROS Electric Variants
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: Ken Conley <kwc@willowgarage.com>
Status: Active
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 05-Aug-2011
Post-History: 05-Aug-2011


Abstract
========

This REP describes the variants for the ROS Electric release. There
are no new variants in this release.  This REP mainly updates REP 108
[1]_ for changes in stack contents.  Otherwise, the variants are the
same as those in REP 108.

Motivation
==========

For a discussion on the general motivation and role of variants,
please see REP 108 [1]_.

In ROS Electric, the ``common`` and ``geometry`` stacks were
reorganized and broken apart into smaller units, and the
``arm_navigation`` stack was heavily reorganized.  Other changes in
ROS Electric include moving more packages to be system dependencies
and updates related to using unary stacks [2]_.

This REP proposes the same entrypoints as REP 108 and merely updates
the variant definitions to reflect the organizational changes in ROS
stacks.


Specification
=============

End-user entry points
---------------------

We define the same three main entry points for ROS users as REP 108 [1]_.

 * desktop-full (recommended)
 * desktop
 * ros-base

Variants
--------

ROS variants
''''''''''''

The `ros-base` variant composes the `ros` and `ros_comm` stacks, which
were separated as part of REP 100 [3]_.  This variant is not allowed
to have any GUI dependencies.

::

  - ros-base:
      stacks: [ros, ros_comm]

The `ros-full` variant adds the `rx` and `documentation` stacks,
which provide useful tools that are not necessary for on-robot
operation.

::

  - ros-full:
      extends: ros-base
      stacks: [rx, documentation]

Robot variant
'''''''''''''

The `robot` variant is defined to be core, stable, ROS libraries for
any robot hardware.  It is the "general robotics" libraries of ROS.
It may not contain any GUI dependencies.

::

  - robot:
      extends: [ros-base]
      stacks: [bond_core, common_msgs, common, diagnostics, 
        driver_common, eigen, filters, bullet, geometry, nodelet_core, 
        orocos_kinematics_dynamics, pluginlib, assimp, robot_model, 
        executive_smach, xacro]


Capability variants
'''''''''''''''''''

The capability variants organize commonly used libraries that are
specific to a class of robots.  We also define a `simulators` variant
that provides an organizational role for higher-level variants.  We
discourage GUI dependencies in these stacks, if possible.

::

  - mobile:
      extends: [robot]
      stacks: [navigation, slam_gmapping, laser_pipeline,
        perception_pcl]

  - perception:
      stacks: [image_common, image_transport_plugins, image_pipeline,
        laser_pipeline, perception_pcl, vision_opencv]

  - move-arm:
      extends: [robot, viz]
      stacks: [arm_navigation, octomap_mapping, kinematics, 
        motion_planners, motion_planning_common, physics_ode, 
        trajectory_filters, perception_pcl, pr2_controllers, control, 
        pr2_mechanism, pr2_common]

  - simulators:
      extends: [robot]
      stacks: [simulator_stage, simulator_gazebo, stage, physics_ode, 
        visualization_common, rx, image_common, perception_pcl]

  - viz:
      extends: [robot]
      stacks: [visualization_common, visualization, rx, image_common, 
        laser_pipeline, executive_smach_visualization, 
        diagnostics_monitors, geometry_visualization,
        robot_model_visualization, geometry_experimental]

  
Desktop variants
''''''''''''''''

The `desktop` variants are main entry points for users.  The
`desktop-full` is a "batteries included" experience for users and
attempts to collect stable, well-documented libraries.  These
libraries may be specific to certain classes of robots, such as mobile
robots, though they are not specific to a particular robot.  The
`desktop` variant is more minimal and only provides the stacks in the
`robot` variant, plus visualization and debugging tools.  Both of these
variants contain tutorials for the stacks they provide.

::

  - desktop:
      extends: [ros-full, robot, viz]
      stacks: [ros_tutorials, common_tutorials, geometry_tutorials,
        visualization_tutorials]
  - desktop-full:
      extends: [desktop, mobile, perception, simulators]

      
Institution-specific
''''''''''''''''''''

Please see REP 108 [1]_ for discussion of institution-specific variants.

This REP also proposes the addition of institution-specific variants.
Institution-specific variants must have the name of the institution to
clearly identify them.  The best practice recommendation is to use the
name of the institution's ros-pkg repository, e.g. "wg-ros-pkg".

An institution is not required to have a variant, and they are mainly
provided for convenience and identity.

Robot-specific
''''''''''''''

Please see REP 108 [1]_ for discussion of robot-specific variants.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

The variant modifications in this REP are fully backwards compatible
with Diamondback.

References
==========

.. [1] REP 108: Diamondback Variants 
   (http://www.ros.org/reps/rep-0108.html)

.. [2] REP 109: Unary Stacks
   (http://www.ros.org/reps/rep-0109.html)

.. [3] REP 100
   (http://ros.org/reps/rep-0100.html)

   
Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.



..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
