REP: 106
Title: Polled topics
Version: $Revision$
Last-Modified: $Date$
Author: Dirk Thomas
Status: Accepted
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 20-Dec-2010
ROS-Version: 1.6
Post-History: 20-Dec-2010

Abstract
========

This REP adds support for filtering messages directly at
the publishing node.  The filtering configuration can be modified
dynamically at runtime.  It does not require additional nodes to be
integrated for performing the filtering.

Motivation
==========

In several scenarios a subscriber needs only a subset of messages
published on a particular topic.  Example use cases are:

* Reduce frequency of messages, e.g., a lower number messages per
  second might be sufficient for visualizing the information.

* Polling messages from topics, e.g. requesting only a single
  (or any other fixed number of) message(s).

The filtering cannot be performed after receiving the messages since
the available bandwidth between publisher (e.g. running on a mobile
robot) and subscriber (e.g. a GUI) running on an external computer
might be (severly) constrained.

Use Cases
=========

Depending on the scenario the demand for receiving messages of a
specific topic might change dynamically at runtime.  It should be
possible to switch seemlessly between normal (unfiltered) and
filtered subscription.

Rationale
=========

The utilization of an additional filter node is not an optimal
solution.  Any topic in a large application might be subscribed to
with particular filter constraints.  The filtering should solely
depend on the subscriber:

* Filtering should not require manual adaption of the communication
  graph (e.g. by introducing a new filtering node).

Currently the package message_filters is used to filter messages.
Even when it is running on the same host as the publisher it
implies an overhead which would be avoided with this REP:

* All messages need to be marshaled and transfered to the filtering
  node (even if skipped / not relayed by the filter).  For high
  update rate topics, large complex messages or resource restricted
  platforms the overhead is significant.

* The publisher is not aware of the *active* subscribers.
  The (optional) awareness of the publisher of the subsequent
  filtering enables skipping resource intensive computations of
  later dropped messages.

Implementation
==============

In the first step the filtering should enable simple polling of
messages.  For that the subscriber must pass the number of polled
messages to each publisher.  This counter is than decreased by the
publisher until it reaches zero, which would result in dropping
any further published messages.

In a future extension it might even be imaginable to pass i.e. a 
Python function which performs the filtering on the publisher.

The implementation consists of three parts:

1. The communication protocol to realize filter functionality.
   It must be implemented for each client library.

2. The API for the subscribing node which makes the new features
   accessible to userland code.

3. The API for the publishing node to make information available
   which messages aresubsequently passed.

1. Communication protocol
-------------------------

The communication protocol is extended with the following opcodes:

* *setPollCounter* with one argument N.
  Sets the poll counter to the value N, which demands for the next
  N message of the topic (actually N messages from  each publisher).
  The argument value zero can be used to drop all further messages.

* *addPollCounter* with one argument N.
  Increases the poll counter by the value N.

* *restoreUnfilteredMode* without arguments.
  Enables to switch back to normal (unfiltered) subscription.

In order to make filtering work from the beginning an additional
flag *useFiltering* must be passes at connection establishment.
This initializes the poll counter with zero and prevents sending
messages in the timeframe between the subscription and the first
received poll-opcode.

The subscriber must be able to check, if the publisher supports the
requested filtering mode.  If not: the userland-code might implement
a reasonable fallback behavior e.g. filter after reception.

2. API on subscriber-side
-------------------------

The *subscribe* methods of the NodeHandle class is extended with an
additional boolean parameter *useFiltering*.

The Subscriber class is extended with additional methods - one for
each opcode.

3. API on publisher-side
------------------------

The Publisher class is extended with a new method
*getActiveNumSubscribers*.  In contrast to the method
getNumSubscribers it returns the subscribers, which will not drop the
next published message.  If this method would return zero the
publisher can omit any computations to calculate the unnecessary
message.  Nevertheless in order for the poll counter to be decreased
the publisher must call the publish method with e.g. a dummy message.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Existing nodes not using the newly introduced filtering functionality
continue to work with no changes.

The message_filters package might utilize this new functionality when
appropriate.

References
==========

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.



..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
