REP: 8
Title: Style Guide for Python Code
Author: Ken Conley <kwc@willowgarage.com>
Status: Active
Type: Process
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 18-Sep-2010
Post-History: 18-Sep-2010


Abstract
========

This document gives coding conventions for the Python code comprising
the standard library in the main ROS distribution.

Since originally being published, this REP has been updated to include
``catkin`` and ``rosbuild`` specific sections where appropriate.

Coding Style
============

Please follow Python's PEP 8 [1]_ for guidelines on formatting, naming, etc...

The Loader
==========

With ``catkin``
---------------

The loader method of accessing Python code in ROS is obsolete if you are using
``catkin``.
When using ``catkin``, the Python code for all packages will be on the
``PYTHONPATH`` after sourcing the ``setup`` file for your workspace.

With ``rosbuild``
-----------------

``roslib`` is the only ROS Python package you can automatically assume to
be importable other than your local files. If your Python package has
dependencies, you must include the following header at the top::

    import roslib
    roslib.load_manifest('your_package_name')

``roslib.load_manifest`` looks at your ``manifest.xml`` and places your
dependencies on your Python path. DO NOT use multiple ``load_manifest``
calls. If you need multiple calls, it's probably because you're
missing the correct dependencies in your manifest.


Package/Module Names (``__init__.py`` files)
============================================

With ``catkin``
---------------

When using ``catkin`` you can organize your Python code in any way that you like, but you must inform Python's ``setuptools`` where your code is located by creating a ``setup.py`` file.
The recommended layout is to put all of your package's importable Python code in the ``src`` folder of your package and in a "Python package" with the same name as your package.
In this case a "Python package" is a folder which contains a ``__init__.py`` file, indicating that the folder contains additional Python packages and modules.

Here is the recommended layout of an example ``catkin`` package called ``my_package`` which contains Python code::

    my_package
    ├── CMakeLists.txt
    ├── package.xml
    ├── setup.py
    └── src
        └── my_package
            ├── __init__.py
            ├── a_nested_python_package
            │   └── __init__.py
            └── a_python_module.py

In this example there is a root Python package in the ``src`` folder called ``my_package``, which follows the recommendation.
This root Python package then contains a Python module called ``a_python_module`` and a nested Python package called ``a_nested_python_package``.

In this example the ``setup.py`` will use the convenience function ``generate_distutils_setup``, which is provided by ``catkin``, in order to extract information like the version and description from the
package's manifest file, i.e. the ``package.xml``:

.. code-block:: python

    from distutils.core import setup
    from catkin_pkg.python_setup import generate_distutils_setup

    d = generate_distutils_setup(
        packages=['my_package', 'my_package.a_nested_python_package'],
        package_dir={'': 'src'},
    )

    setup(**d)

Note that the ``packages`` parameter points to all Python packages which should be installed, even the nested one.
Also note the ``package_dir`` parameter indicates that all aforementioned packages are located in the ``src`` folder by using the empty string as a key.
This standard boiler plate configuration for Python packages allows you to place your Python code anywhere you like within your package and follows the Python ``setuptools`` conventions.

If your package contains messages or services then they will generate code into a Python package called ``msgs`` or ``srvs`` in the root of your package's "Python package", e.g. ``my_package/msgs`` or ``my_package/srvs``.
Though this generated code does not go into your package's source code, it does get merged with your package's Python source when getting installed.
This is a new mechanism introduced with ``catkin`` because ``catkin`` installs into a FHS [5]_ layout, whereas ``rosbuild`` did not have an install step.

Your package shares a global ``PYTHONPATH`` namespace with other packages (system Python packages as well as ROS packages with Python code), so be considerate when creating Python packages at the root of your package's ``src`` folder as they can collide with others.

Installing Scripts with catkin
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

We distinguish between "nodes" and "scripts" for clarity to users.
Nodes are executable Python files that conform to the ROS node API.
Scripts are executable Python files that do not conform to the ROS node API.

Here is an example of a package with a node and a script:

    my_package
    ├── CMakeLists.txt
    ├── nodes
    │   └── my_node
    ├── package.xml
    ├── scripts
    │   └── my_script
    └── setup.py
    ...

Executable Python files, which can either be general scripts or "nodes", may be installed in one of two ways.

----

One way is to use the ``catkin_install_python`` CMake macro.
This macro will take a Python script and install it to the given destination, rewriting the shebang (``#!/usr/bin/env python``) line if necessary.
This mimics the behavior of how Python's ``setuptools`` installs scripts.
The recommendation is to install these types of scripts to the "bin destination" folder (a.k.a. ``libexec``), which makes the scripts accessible from ``rosrun`` but does not expose them on the global system ``PATH``.
These scripts are isolated by package, so there is no chance of colliding with another package's script of the same name.
For example:

.. code-block:: cmake

  catkin_install_python(PROGRAMS nodes/my_node
    DESTINATION ${CATKIN_PACKAGE_BIN_DESTINATION})

In this case the ``nodes/my_node`` is the location of the node you want to install relative to the location of the ``CMakeLists.txt`` file which contains these lines.
This ``CMakeLists.txt`` file is usually in the root of the package's source, but can be in other folders in some situations.

----

The other option is to use the ``setup.py`` to install Python scripts to the ``bin`` folder which is on the system ``PATH``.
This means that these scripts are not found by ``rosrun``, but they are runnable from the shell directly.
This is not the recommended way to install you scripts because it increases the chance of a collision with another package's scripts.
Use with caution, but here is an example of how to add a script to your ``setup.py``:

.. code-block:: python

    from distutils.core import setup
    from catkin_pkg.python_setup import generate_distutils_setup

    d = generate_distutils_setup(
        scripts=['scripts/my_script'],
        ...
    )

    setup(**d)

In this example, ``scripts/my_script`` is the location of the script you want to install relative to the location of this ``setup.py`` file, which should be in the root of your package source.

With ``rosbuild``
-----------------

All python code must be placed within a module namespace. ROS exports
your Python source directory to be on the path of any of your
dependents (packages which depend on you), so it is important not to
accidentally clobber someone else's import. We strongly recommend that this
module name be the same as your ROS package name.

There are two recommended code layouts:

Small modules with no msg/srvs::

    packagename
     |- nodes/
        |- ROS node executable files
     |- src/
        |- packagename.py
     |- scripts/
        |- non-exported python files

Module with msgs/srvs::

    packagename
     |- nodes/
        |- ROS node executable files
     |- src/
        |- packagename/
          |- __init__.py
          |- yourfiles.py
     |- scripts/
        |- non-exported python files

We distinguish between "nodes" and "scripts" for clarity to
users. Nodes are executable Python files that conform to the ROS node
API. Scripts are executable Python files that do not conform to the
ROS node API.

If you don't know what an __init__.py file is, we recommend that you
read `What is init py used for?
<http://effbot.org/pyfaq/what-is-init-py-used-for.htm>`_?

The more complicated layout for msg/srv files is required as the
Python msg/srv generators will need to generate files into your
package's namespace.

In the rare case that you can't place your source code in src/
(e.g. thirdparty code), you can override the Python export path of
your package by editing your manifest.

Node Files
==========

In ROS, the name of a node type is the same as its executable
name. Typically, for python files, this means including #!/usr/bin/env
python at the top of your main code file.

If your node is simple, this file may contain the entire code for
it. Otherwise, the node file will likely do an import packagename and
invoke code there.

NOTE: we strive to keep ROS-specific code separate from reusable,
generic code. The separation of 'node files' and files you place in
src/packagename helps encourage this.


Python Features and Version
===========================

The target version of Python changes based on the requirements for each distribution.
See REP-0003 [2]_ for the target Python version for each ROS distribution.

Currently, as of 2015, the target is Python 2.7+, but we wish to encourage
code that is easily transitioned to Python 3 [3]_ [6]_.

This means you should follow the recommended guidelines on the ROS wiki:

http://wiki.ros.org/python_2_and_3_compatible_code

References
==========

.. [1] PEP 8, Style Guide for Python Code, van Rossum
   http://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/

.. [2] REP 3, Target Platforms, Foote, Conley
   http://www.ros.org/reps/rep-0003.html

.. [3] PEP 3100, Miscellaneous Python 3.0 Plans, Cannon
   http://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-3100

.. [4] PEP 238, Changing the Division Operator, Zadka
   http://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0238

.. [5] Wikipedia: Filesystem Hiearchy Standard
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Filesystem_Hierarchy_Standard

.. [6] ROS Python 2/3 Compatibility Guidelines
   http://wiki.ros.org/python_2_and_3_compatible_code

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.

..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
