REP: 124
Title: Changes to roslaunch and rosrun for REP 122 and catkin build system
Author: Ken Conley, Brian Gerkey
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 8-Feb-2012
ROS-Version: Fuerte
Post-History: 8-Feb-2012

Abstract
========

This REP describes changes to roslaunch [1]_ made necessary by the
Filesystem Hierarchy Standard [2]_ changes in REP 122 [3]_ as well as
changes necessary for compatibility with the catkin build system.  A
non-backwards-compatible change is introduced for the ``<machine>``
tag.  The mechanism for locating package-relative executables is also
changed in order to find executables in an out-of-source, catkin-based
build.


Specification
=============

<machine> tag
-------------

The `<machine>` tag now uses the following syntax for setting
environment variables on a remote machine::

    <machine env-loader="path/to/env-loader.sh" />

For example::

    <machine env-loader="/opt/ros/fuerte/env.sh" />

The ``env-loader`` file must be an executable script that accepts
variable-length arguments.  After performing environment setup, the
script must then execute its arguments as a command.  ROS
installations come with a default environment loader file.

The ``env-loader`` attribution is *optional*.  If it is not set, it
defaults to ``/opt/ros/<distro-name>/env.sh``, where ``<distro-name>`` is
the ROS distribution named defined by the rules in REP 123 [2]_.

The following attributes are no longer supported and will raise errors::

    ros-root
    ros-package-path

Also, the ``<env>`` tag is no longer supported inside of a
``<machine>`` tag and will also raise an error.

etc/ros/roscore.xml
-------------------

The configuraton file for ``roscore`` is now stored in ``etc/ros``.
roslaunch obeys REP 123 [2]_ for locating ``etc/ros``.  

This ``roscore.xml`` configuration file is a roslaunch file that
defines the nodes that are launched with ``roscore`` is run.  It was
previously stored in the ``roslaunch`` directory.

Package-relative executables
----------------------------

The following sections describe the effects on and updates to the ROS
package-relative specification for the new FHS layout.  They also
discuss changes to Python library loading and a minor change to the
ROS package manifest format.


Locating package-relative executables in the install tree
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Package-relative executables are files specified with
``(<ros-package-name>, <file-name>)``, where ``<file-name>`` denotes a
file with executable permissions located anywhere in the directory
root of ``<ros-package-name>``.

Following the specification for ``share/``, package-relative
executables are stored in ``share/ros-package-name/bin/executable``.
In an install tree, ``ROS_PACKAGE_PATH`` includes the ``share/`` path.
Thus, there are no updates to the package-relative executable
specification for an install tree.


Locating package-relative executables in CATKIN_BINARY_DIR
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

We amend the package-relative specification for the
catkin-based binary builds, which builds out-of-source binaries
outside of the ROS source package tree.

In order to find executables generated to a catkin-based build
directory, tools must example the
``$CATKIN_BINARY_DIR/etc/packages.list`` file for

``packages.list`` is a text file, where each line is of the form::

    <ros-package-name> <relative-file-path>

For example::

    rosconsole ros_comm/tools/rosconsole

To locate a package-relative executable when the ``CATKIN_BINARY_DIR``
environment variable is set, tools use the following precedence:

 1. If an entry ``<ros-package-name> <relative-file-path>`` is in
    ``packages.list``, look for binary in
    ``$CATKIN_BINARY_DIR/<relative-file-path>``
 2. If executable is not found yet, look for the executable in the ROS package directory.

This implementation assumes that the underlying build system, catkin,
properly separates executables into separate directories based on ROS
package name to prevent collisions.

This portion of the specification is potentially volatile, as it
depends on a implementation that has not been reviewed yet.


Motivation
==========

The changes in this REP enable roslaunch to maintain compatibility
with the changes introduced by REP 122.  As the FHS layout and
underlying out-of-source build implementation affect the location of
binaries and data files, roslaunch is heavily impacted by these
changes.

In the longer term, changes to the roslaunch model may enable even
better integration with the REP 122 changes.  Such changes are
considered out-of-scope for this REP, which is instead focused on
compatibility updates.


Rationale
=========

Locating executables in catkin build directories
------------------------------------------------

In order to facilitate an efficient write-compile-run development
cycle, it is necessary to easily run executables that are compiled to
the build directory.  In particular, because tools like roslaunch and
rosrun use a package-relative scheme for locating executables, this
same scheme must work with build artifacts.  Otherwise, the user would
have to install the build artifacts, which would lengthen the
development cycle.

Out-of-source build systems are more complicated as an executable may
be a binary build artifact, or it can be a script with executable
permission in the source tree.  

An alternative would be to make allow a package to have multiple
directories, such as setting the ``ROS_PACKAGE_PATH`` to point to
multiple locations.  This would have numerous undesireable effects,
such as disabling the ability to override existing packages, and also
not have backwards-compatibility with many tools.

Another alternative would be to copy the entire source tree into the
build space and point the ``ROS_PACKAGE_PATH`` there.  This is similar
to how tools like Eclipse perform out-of-source builds.  This was
considered undesireable as it would lengthen the development cycle for
script executables, such as Python scripts, as a build would be
required each time the script was modified in order to copy it back to
the build space.

There are even more alternatives, but the ``packages.list``
specification ultimately is desireable for its simplicity.

The particular implementation using ``CATKIN_BINARY_DIR`` creates a
design coupling with the catkin build system.  It would be desireable
to have a more general mechanism for preserving the semantics in an
out-of-source build.  However, as the specification places
requirements on the underlying build system as well, such as keeping
executables for packages in separate directories.  Thus, this design
coupling in unavoidable, so it is made explicit.


env-loader optional
-------------------

The ``env-loader`` attribute was made optional because the most common
value encodes the name of the current ROS distribution.  This would
make it difficult, moving forward, to maintain the same set of launch
files for different distributions.  The default value will allow
things to "just work" in the most common case.
    

Breaking compatibility with <machine> tag
-----------------------------------------

The rationale for these changes is discussed in the "Backwards
Compatibility" section below.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

The roslaunch ``<machine>`` tag previously assumed that it was
possible to construct the remote execution environment using
``ROS_ROOT`` and ``ROS_PACKAGE_PATH``.  As described above,
``ROS_ROOT`` no longer describes the path to ROS top-level binaries,
including the ``roslaunch`` executable.

There is no way to correctly determine the remote execution
environment using the ``<machine>`` tag as specified in ROS Electric.
roslaunch could attempt to infer settings by pattern matching on the
values present in the tag, but this approach would be very brittle.

Instead, there is an intentional, non-backwards-compatible change to
the ``<machine>`` tag so that users are immediately notified of this
issue and can easily migrate to the new tag.  This requires developers
to maintain two sets of launch files with machine tags if they wish to
use them both in ROS Fuerte and previous ROS distributions.  This is
inconvenient, but less problematic than hard-to-debug issues with
remote environment setup.



References
==========

.. [1] roslaunch wiki page
   (http://ros.org/wiki/roslaunch)
.. [2] Wikipedia: Filesystem Hiearchy Standard
   (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Filesystem_Hierarchy_Standard)
.. [3] REP 122: FHS layout for ROS installation
   (http://ros.org/reps/rep-0122.html) 
.. [4] REP 123: ROS_ETC_DIR, ROS_DISTRO environment variables and ROS_ROOT changes
   (http://ros.org/reps/rep-0123.html) 



Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.



..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:

