REP: 128
Title: Naming Conventions for Catkin Based Workspaces
Author: Tully Foote, Dirk Thomas
Status: Active
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 16-Oct-2012
Post-History: 03-Jul-2014


Abstract
========

This REP provides naming conventions for how to refer to paths on a
computer in documentation and debugging.


Rationale
=========

This REP has been written to make reading and writing documentation
easier and more consistent and to remove ambiguities when
communicating about the code layout of a specific installation.

Recommended Layout
==================

The recommended layout for development is as follows:

::

    workspace_folder/        --WORKSPACE
      src/                   --SOURCE SPACE
        CMakeLists.txt       --This is symlinked to catkin/cmake/toplevel.cmake
        package_1/
          CMakeLists.txt
          package.xml
        ...
        package_n/
          CATKIN_IGNORE      --Optionally place this marker file to exclude package_n from being processed. Its file type (e.g. regular file, directory) and contents don't matter. It may even be a dangling symlink.
          CMakeLists.txt
          package.xml
      build/                 --BUILD SPACE(this is where build system is invoked, not necessarily within workspace)
        CATKIN_IGNORE        --Marking the folder to be ignored when crawling for packages (necessary when source space is in the root of the workspace, the file is emtpy)
      devel/                 --DEVEL SPACE (targets go here, parameterizable, but defaults to peer of Build Space)
        bin/
        etc/
        include/
        lib/
        share/
        .catkin              --Marking the folder as a development space (the file contains a semicolon separated list of Source space paths)
        env.bash
        setup.bash
        setup.sh
        ...
      install/               --INSTALL SPACE (this is where installed targets for test installations go, not necessarily within workspace)
        bin/
        etc/
        include/
        lib/
        share/
        .catkin              --Marking the folder as an install space (the file is empty)
        env.bash
        setup.bash
        setup.sh
        ...

Elements of the Workspace
=========================

When talking about a workspace used in development there are several names

Workspace
---------

The workspace is the folder inside which you are going to be actively
developing.  Keeping things in a folder with connected development
helps keep separation of development models.

Source Space
------------

The source space is the folder is where catkin will be expected to
look for packages when building.  This folder is easily identified as
it is where the toplevel.cmake is linked from the catkin project.

Each catkin project desired to be compiled from source should be
checked out into subdirectories inside this directory. Packages are
found recursively so they do not have to be direct subfolders.

Build Space
-----------

The build space is the folder in which cmake is invoked and generates
artifacts such as the CMakeCache

A typical invocation of cmake will look like this when following the recommended layout.

::

    cmake ../src

Development Space
-----------------

The development space is where catkin generates the binaries and
runtime libraries which are executable before installation.  This
folder will be an approximation of FHS layout however only containing
artifacts from the associated source space.

After the build step, inside this folder is expected everything needed
to run nodes in packages which have been built.

The development space can not be a folder which contains ROS packages
in subfolders.
E.g. it can not equal to the workspace root as this would make the
source space a subfolder which would lead to packages being found
multiple times.

Install Space
-------------

If ``make install`` is called this is the directory into which cmake
will target all installations.  Again creating an FHS style directory
structure with a setup.(ba)sh in the root. This can be set to any
directory using the ``-DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=/any/directory`` as an
option to cmake.  The cmake default is ``/usr/local``.

The same restriction as for development spaces applies to the install
space.
This also implies that install spaces and development spaces must not
be nested within each other.

System Install Space
''''''''''''''''''''

The system install space is a special category of the installation
space which is expected to be a shared installation for all users on
the system.  Usually this is installed from your package manager.  The
default for this location is ``/opt/ros/ROSDISTRO`` where ROSDISTRO is
the codename for the ROS distro being used.

Result Space
------------
The term result space can be used for either a development space or an
install space.
In cases where either of those two specific terms would do, the
generic term should be used instead.
To visually distinguish the result space from spaces that have a direct
folder name correspondence (such as the folder ``install`` for the install
space) it is recommended to refer to the result space as ``RESULT-SPACE``
in documentation, for example:
::

    source RESULT-SPACE/setup.sh

Overlays
========
In catkin style workspaces, overlaying of one workspace on top of
another workspace is supported.  Each overlay can be built on top of
another overlay, and any packages in a higher overlay will mask out
packages in lower overlays.

Note: When overlaying any package all packages which depend on that
package must be overlayed if they are intended to be used.  This must
be checked by the user creating the overlays.  If a core package is
overlayed and changes how it works, any package which depends on it
and relies on the old behavior (whether runtime, or link time) will
crash.

Catkin creates FHS [CITE FHS] style layouts in the devel and install
spaces.  [cite above] These spaces can be included into another
workspace using the CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH pointing to either the devel
space or install space.  If it is an installed space make install must
have been called, if a devel space, it must have been built with make.

Examples
========
Here are some examples showing basic usage.

Let us say we have several catkin workspaces in our home folder (~/).

::

 ~/workspace1/
     src/
     build/
     devel/
 ~/workspace2/
     src/
     build/
     devel/
 ~/workspace3/
     src/
     build/
     devel/

Example 1: Installing workspace1 to system
::

  export CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=/opt/ros/groovy
  cd ~/workspace1/build
  cmake ../src
  make
  make install

Alternatively you can set CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX when calling cmake in the third step:
::

  cd ~/workspace1/build
  cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=/opt/ros/groovy ../src
  make
  make install

Example 2: Overlaying workspace2 on top of workspace1's devel space
::

  source ~/workspace1/devel/setup.bash
  cd ~/workspace2/build
  cmake ../src
  make

Example 3: Overlaying workspace 2 on top of workspace1's devel space on top of system installation
::

  source ~/workspace1/devel/setup.bash
  cd ~/workspace2/build
  cmake ../src
  make

Example 4: Overlaying workspace 3 on top of local workspace2 install space on top of workspace1 devel space on top of system install
::

  cd ~/workspace2/build
  cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=~/ws2_installed ../src
  make
  make install

  source ~/ws2_installed/setup.bash

  cd ~/workspace3/build
  cmake ../src
  make

Mixing catkin And rosbuild Workspaces
=====================================
catkin was designed to allow rosbuild packages to sit on top of catkin ones.
This is accomplished by using overlays. A rosbuild overlay can overlay either
a catkin workspace devel space or installspace. The setup.*sh file for the rosbuild
workspace will, when sourced, also source the respective setup.*sh of the catkin
workspace.

Though one could technically utilize the same folder for a rosbuild
workspace and a catkin workspace, our recommended layout is to isolate
rosbuild and catkin workspaces in their own folders.

::

  ~/rosbuild_ws/
     dry_pkg1/
     ...
     dry_pkgN/
     setup.bash
     setup.sh
  ~/catkin_ws/
     src/
       wet_pkg1/
       ...
       wet_pkgN/
     build/
     devel/
       setup.bash
       setup.sh
     install/
       setup.bash
       setup.sh

The steps to achieve this layout are:

1. Create catkin_ws and catkin_ws/src folder
2. Run catkin_make in catkin_ws
3. Run rosws init ~/rosbuild_ws/ ~/catkin_ws/devel (or install)

With this layout, sourcing ~/rosbuild_ws/setup.*sh also sources ~/catkin_ws/devel/setup.*sh


References
==========

.. [1] REP 1, REP Purpose and Guidelines, Warsaw, Hylton
   (https://ros.org/reps/rep-0001.html)


Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.


..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
