REP: 149
Title: ROS Package Manifest Format Three Specification
Author: Dirk Thomas
Status: Final
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 11-Oct-2017
Post-History: 02-Jan-2018

Outline
=======

#. Abstract_
#. Motivation_
#. Rationale_
#. `Data Representation`_
#. Compatibility_
#. Schema_
#. References_
#. Copyright_

.. raw:: html

  Significant changes compared to REP-0140 [2]_ are highlighted in
  <font color="red">red</font>.
  Trivial changes appear in <font color="blue">blue</font>.


Abstract
========

.. raw:: html

  <font color="blue">

This REP specifies the third ``package.xml`` format, which is an update to the
previous versions specified in REP-0127 [1]_ and REP-0140 [2]_.

.. raw:: html

  </font>


Motivation
==========

.. raw:: html

  <font color="red">

This REP covers three separate topics which are described in the following
subsections.

A source tree containing a conformant ``package.xml`` file in its root
directory is called a "**ROS package**," regardless of whether it uses or is
used by ROS.
When unambiguous from context, this may simply be referred to as a
"**package**".

Dependency groups
-----------------

Several ROS packages aggregate dependencies of a specific type, e.g.
`message_generation` in ROS 1 or `rmw_implementation` in ROS 2.
They explicitly list the dependencies which are being used during the release
process.
But when building from source they need to be updated to add custom message
generators or rmw implementations.

The goal is to allow specifying this kind of group dependency in a way that a
from-source build can process the custom packages accordingly to make them
available to the package even though the package doesn't list an explicit
dependency on the custom package.

ABI version on the package level
--------------------------------

When building binary packages on the ROS buildfarm there is no assumption
about ABI compatibility.
When a new Debian package has been built all downstream packages are being
rebuilt too in order to ensure they still work together.
This makes e.g. releasing a core package like `catkin` or `roscpp`
particularly costly.
Due to that overhead changes which should be released rather sooner than
later, e.g. a documentation fix or simple bugfix in a `.cpp` file, are being
held back to group them with other changes to make the rebuild effort
worthwhile.

In order to allow package releases without enforcing a rebuild of all
downstream packages a package should be able to declare if such a rebuild
is necessary or not.

Packages across ROS 1 and ROS 2
-----------------------------------

In order for a ROS package to work with ROS 1 and ROS 2 from a single source
the dependencies listed in the package manifest are a problem.
E.g. in ROS 1 a package needs to depend on `roscpp` where as in ROS 2 it needs
to depend on `rclcpp`.
This amends the manifest to support this use case.

The necessary part outside of the manifest to make a package compatible with
ROS 1 as well as ROS 2 is explicitly not part of this document.
In general it is possible to conditionally handle those cases in programming
languages like CMake, C++, Python, etc.

See `Alternatives for Universal Packages`_ for options not chosen.

.. raw:: html

  </font>


Rationale
=========

.. raw:: html

  <font color="blue">

REP-0127 [1]_ and REP-0140 [1]_ provide the ``package.xml`` design rationale
for format one and two, which is not repeated here.

.. raw:: html

  </font>

.. raw:: html

  <font color="red">

Group dependencies
------------------

Packages can already express direct dependencies on other individual packages,
but this is not sufficient for cases where a package needs to be built after
all instances of a particular kind of package.
Instead packages need to be able to declare a dependency on packages without
using their name directly.

One alternative is to "reverse" the dependency declaration so that a package
states that it "wants" to be a dependency of another package.
But that approach does not work in the case where the other package gets forked
under a different name since the "reverse" dependency would still only
reference the original package name.

Therefore the dependency declaration is being decoupled into two parts:

 * *(A)* packages declaring a dependency on a "group dependency name", e.g.
   `ros1_bridge` can depend on the group "message_packages"

 * *(B)* packages declaring to be part of a group dependency identified by its
   name, e.g. `sensor_msgs` can declare itself part of the "message_packages"
   group

During a from-source build the build tool can use the information from all
package manifests in the workspace to identify group dependencies.
It can use this information to process group members before the packages
declaring the group dependency as if the dependency was declared explicitly
using the existing `depend` tags.

The group dependency (A) is declared with a `group_depend` tag.
The content of the group dependency tag is the name of the group.
Leading and trailing whitespace is being ignored from the name and for
consistency it is required to follow the naming rules for packages.

The membership of a group (B) is declared with a `member_of_group` tag.

ABI version attribute
---------------------

The early draft of REP 127 ("package.xml format 1") proposed an attribute
(`abi_version`) to identify the package version which is considered
"compatible".

Since at the time no consensus could be reached about specifying ABI
compatibility in general (for packages as well as libraries) the proposed
attribute was removed from the draft (see related discussions [13]_, [14]_,
[15]_).

Since then the number of packages in a ROS distributions has increased
(e.g. Indigo has more than 2500 packages) as well as the number of platforms
ROS provides binary packages for.
Therefore the need to avoid unnecessary rebuilds has increased.
It is also desired to be able to encourage more frequent releases if they
don't require downstream packages to be rebuilt.

Packages across ROS 1 and ROS 2
-----------------------------------

In order for a ROS package to work with ROS 1 and ROS 2 from a single source
the manifest must describe the package's requirements for both cases.
This means describing different dependencies (`rclcpp` vs `roscpp`), and
possibly a different build type (`catkin` vs `ament_cmake`).

The ``condition`` attribute as defined for `\<build_depend\> (multiple)`_ is
intended to satisfy this use case.
A package may define one manifest where all tags supporting the `condition`
attribute are conditioned on the environment variable `ROS_VERSION`.
The value is a string with an integer: **1** or **2**.

Various tools will need to be aware of the condition responsible for choosing
which dependencies should be used:

 * `bloom`
 * `rosdep`
 * `rosinstall_generator`
 * the build tool

A new field must be added to the distribution file specified in REP 143
[16]_ so that a ROS distribution "knows" which ROS version it represents.

The build tool does not have access to the ROS distribution metadata.
It could either use information provided by an environment variable or fall
back to consider *all* dependencies (independent of their annotation) and work
on the assumption that the workspace contains a set of consistent packages and
additional dependencies from other ROS versions are not available in the
workspace.

.. raw:: html

  </font>


Data Representation
===================

The package manifest is an XML file, with restricted syntax.

The only top-level element allowed is ``<package>``.  Immediately
subordinate to that are several required or optional elements, defined
here.  No other tags are permitted directly under the ``<package>``
element.

.. raw:: html

  <font color="blue">

<package format="3">
--------------------

The ``<package>`` tag is the unique top-level tag in a ``package.xml``
file.  All other tags are nested under it.

.. raw:: html

  </font>

Attributes
''''''''''

  ``format="NUMBER"``

  Specifying the ``package.xml`` format being used.  If not set,
  ``format="1"`` would be assumed, which is *not* the format described
  here.  For this interface, you *must* specify ``format="3"``.  If
  you are using a different format, please refer to the relevant
  specification.  REP-0127 [1]_ described format one, REP-0140 [12]_ format two.

Required Tags
-------------

The required tags in a ``package.xml`` file provide package meta-data:

 * `\<name\>`_
 * `\<version\>`_
 * `\<description\>`_
 * `\<maintainer\> (multiple, but at least one)`_
 * `\<license\> (multiple, but at least one)`_

Optional Tags
-------------

Meta-information
''''''''''''''''

Optional, but recommended, meta-data include the names of the original
authors and links to support documentation.

 * `\<url\> (multiple)`_
 * `\<author\> (multiple)`_

Dependencies
''''''''''''

The dependencies and relations to other packages and system packages
have been discussed in [7]_.  They are described using:

 * `\<build_depend\> (multiple)`_
 * `\<build_export_depend\> (multiple)`_
 * `\<buildtool_depend\> (multiple)`_
 * `\<buildtool_export_depend\> (multiple)`_
 * `\<exec_depend\> (multiple)`_
 * `\<depend\> (multiple)`_
 * `\<doc_depend\> (multiple)`_
 * `\<test_depend\> (multiple)`_
 * `\<conflict\> (multiple)`_
 * `\<replace\> (multiple)`_

These dependency tags are used with both system packages and ROS
packages.  For system dependencies specify the rosdep key name, for
ROS dependencies use the package name.

The dependency graph must be acyclic.  No package may directly or
indirectly depend on itself.

Group dependencies and memberships
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

  .. raw:: html

    <font color="red">

  The group dependencies and membership of groups are described using:

   * `\<group_depend\> (multiple)`_
   * `\<member_of_group\> (multiple)`_

  These group dependencies are only applied in from-source builds and are being
  ignored in the release process.

  The dependency graph must be acyclic even when considering group dependencies.

  .. raw:: html

    </font>

Various
'''''''

There is a need for additional meta-data in the manifest for other
tools that work with packages, like message generators and plugin
discovery.  Tags for that kind of information are wrapped within this
tag:

 * `\<export\>`_

Some ``<export>`` tags used by catkin are defined below.  Others are
defined by various tools, which must specify their own specific tag
structures.

Example
-------

::

  <package format="2">
    <name>my_package</name>
    <version>1.2.3</version>
    <description>
      This is my package's description.
    </description>
    <maintainer email="someone@example.com">Someone</maintainer>

    <license>BSD</license>
    <license file="LICENSE">LGPL</license>

    <url type="website">http://wiki.ros.org/my_package</url>
    <url type="repository">http://www.github.com/my_org/my_package</url>
    <url type="bugtracker">http://www.github.com/my_org/my_package/issues</url>
    <author>John Doe</author>
    <author email="jane.doe@example.com">Jane Doe</author>

    <buildtool_depend>catkin</buildtool_depend>
    <build_depend version_gte="1.1" version_lt="2.0">genmsg</build_depend>

    <depend>roscpp</depend>

    <build_depend>libgstreamer0.10-dev</build_depend>
    <build_export_depend>libgstreamer0.10-dev</build_export_depend>
    <exec_depend>libgstreamer0.10-0</exec_depend>

    <test_depend>gtest</test_depend>

    <doc_depend>doxygen</doc_depend>

    <conflict>alternative_implementation</conflict>

    <replace>my_old_package</replace>

    <export>
      ...
    </export>
  </package>


<name>
------

The package name must start with a letter and contain only lowercase
alphabetic, numeric or underscore characters [2]_.  The package name
should be unique within the ROS community.  It may differ from the
folder name into which it is checked out, but that is *not* recommended.

The following recommended exemptions apply, which are optional for
implementations:

- Dashes may be permitted in package names. This is to support
  maintaining a consistent dependency name when transitioning back
  and forth between a system dependency and in-workspace package,
  since many rosdep keys contain dashes (inherited from the
  Debian/Ubuntu name).
- In support of some legacy packages, capital letters may also be
  accepted in the package name, with a validation warning.


<version>
---------

The version number of the package in the format ``MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH``
where each part is numeric only.

Attributes
''''''''''

  .. raw:: html

    <font color="red">

  ``compatibility="MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH"``

  Specifying the version up to which the package is compatible with, i.e.
  always pick the oldest compatible version.
  If not set, the same value as specified in the ``version`` tag is assumed.

  "Compatibility" in this context guarantees that downstream packages built
  against the older version will continue to work with a newer version
  without the need to be rebuilt.
  This includes but is not limited to ABI compatibility.
  Changes in other parts of a package (CMake, Python, etc.) could also
  require downstream packages to be rebuilt and therefore not qualify as
  "compatible".

  .. raw:: html

    </font>

<description>
-------------

The description of the package. It can consist of multiple lines and
may contain XHTML.  But depending on where the description is used
XML tags and multiple whitespaces might be stripped.


<maintainer> (multiple, but at least one)
-----------------------------------------

The name of the person maintaining the package.  All packages require
a maintainer.  For orphaned packages see below.

Attributes
''''''''''

 ``email="name@domain.tld"`` *(required)*

  Email address of the maintainer.

An orphaned package is one with no current maintainer.
Orphaned packages should use the following maintainer information to
guide volunteers how they can claim maintainership:

Example
'''''''

::

  <maintainer email="ros-orphaned-packages@googlegroups.com">Unmaintained see http://wiki.ros.org/MaintenanceGuide#Claiming_Maintainership</maintainer>


<license> (multiple, but at least one)
--------------------------------------

Name of license for this package, e.g. BSD, GPL, LGPL.  In order to
assist machine readability, only include the license name in this tag.
For multiple licenses multiple separate tags must be used.  A package
will have multiple licenses if different source files have different
licenses.  Every license occurring in the source files should have
a corresponding ``<license>`` tag.  For any explanatory text about
licensing caveats, please use the ``<description>`` tag.

Most common open-source licenses are described on the
`OSI website <http://www.opensource.org/licenses/alphabetical>`_.

Commonly used license strings:

 - Apache 2.0
 - BSD
 - Boost Software License
 - GPLv2
 - GPLv3
 - LGPLv2.1
 - LGPLv3
 - MIT
 - Mozilla Public License Version 1.1

Attributes
''''''''''

  .. raw:: html

    <font color="blue">

 ``file="FILE"`` *(optional)*

  A path relative to the ``package.xml`` file containing the full license text.

  Many licenses require including the license text when redistributing the
  software.
  E.g. the ``Apache License, Version 2.0`` states in paragraph 4.1:
  
    "You must give any other recipients of the Work or Derivative Works a copy of this License"

  .. raw:: html

    </font>

<url> (multiple)
----------------

A Uniform Resource Locator for the package's website, bug tracker or
source repository.

It is a good idea to include ``<url>`` tags pointing users to these
resources.  The website is commonly a wiki page on ``ros.org`` where
users can find and update information about the package.

Attributes
''''''''''

 ``type="TYPE"`` *(optional)*

 The type should be one of the following identifiers: ``website``
 (default), ``bugtracker`` or ``repository``.


<author> (multiple)
-------------------

The name of a person who is an author of the package, as
acknowledgement of their work and for questions.

Attributes
''''''''''

 ``email="name@domain.tld"`` *(optional)*

  Email address of author.


Dependency tags
---------------

<build_depend> (multiple)
'''''''''''''''''''''''''

Declares a rosdep key or ROS package name that this package requires
at build-time.  For system packages, the rosdep key will normally
specify the "development" package, which frequently ends in ``"-dev"``.

The ``build`` and ``buildtool`` dependencies are used to determine
the build order of multiple packages.

Attributes
..........

 All dependencies and relationships may restrict their applicability
 to particular versions.  For each comparison operator an attribute
 can be used.  Two of these attributes can be used together to
 describe a version range.

 ``version_lt="VERSION"`` *(optional)*

 The dependency to the package is restricted to versions less than
 the stated version number.

 ``version_lte="VERSION"`` *(optional)*

 The dependency to the package is restricted to versions less or
 equal than the stated version number.

 ``version_eq="VERSION"`` *(optional)*

 The dependency to the package is restricted to a version equal than
 the stated version number.

 ``version_gte="VERSION"`` *(optional)*

 The dependency to the package is restricted to versions greater or
 equal than the stated version number.

 ``version_gt="VERSION"`` *(optional)*

 The dependency to the package is restricted to versions greater than
 the stated version number.

 .. raw:: html

   <font color="red">

 ``condition="CONDITION_EXPRESSION"``

 Every dependency can be conditional on a condition expression.
 If the condition expression evaluate to "true" the dependency is being used
 and considered as if it doesn't have a condition attribute.
 If the condition expression evaluate to "false" the dependency is being
 ignored and considered as if it doesn't exist.

 The condition expression can consist of:

  * parenthesis (which must be balanced)
  * logical operators `and` and `or`
  * comparison operators: `==`, `!=`, `<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=`
  * variable names which start with a `$` sign and are followed by
    alphanumerics and underscores
  * literals which can only contain alphanumerics, undercsores and dashes
  * arbitrary whitespaces between these tokens

 An expression syntactically correct by the previous definition will be
 evaluated as follows:

  * All variables are substituted by their values and treated as strings.
  * All literals are also treated as strings.
  * The resulting expression is evaluated as a Python interpreter would
    evaluate it.
    Please note that the comparison operators only do a *string* comparison and
    don't attempt to interpret the string as a numerical value.

 Tools may populate the values for the variables starting with a `$` sign in
 different ways, but typically they are evaluated as environment variables.

 As an example, a dependency might only be needed in a ROS 1 environment.
 Such dependency could be described as follows where the value of
 `$ROS_VERSION` is coming from an environment variable:

 ``<depend condition="$ROS_VERSION == 1">roscpp</depend>``

 .. raw:: html

   </font>


<build_export_depend> (multiple)
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Declares a rosdep key or ROS package name that this package needs as
part of some build interface it exports.  For system packages, the
rosdep key will normally specify the "development" package, which
frequently ends in ``"-dev"``.

The ``<build_export_depend>`` declares a transitive build dependency.  A
common example is when one of your dependencies provides a header file
included in some header exported by your package.  Even if your
package does not use that header when building itself, other packages
depending on your header *will* require those transitive dependencies
when they are built.

Attributes
..........

 The same attributes as for `\<build_depend\> (multiple)`_.


<buildtool_depend> (multiple)
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Declares a rosdep key or ROS package name for a tool that is executed
during the build process.  For cross-compilation, one must distinguish
these from normal build dependencies, which may be linked with your
package and must be compiled for the target architecture, not the
build system.  For system packages, the rosdep key will normally
specify the "development" package, which frequently ends in
``"-dev"``.


Attributes
..........

 The same attributes as for `\<build_depend\> (multiple)`_.


<buildtool_export_depend> (multiple)
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Declares a rosdep key or ROS package name that this package exports
which must be compiled and run on the build system, not the target
system.  For cross-compilation, one must distinguish these from target
build dependencies, which may be linked with your package and must be
compiled for the target architecture.


Attributes
..........

 The same attributes as for `\<build_depend\> (multiple)`_.


<exec_depend> (multiple)
''''''''''''''''''''''''

Declares a rosdep key or ROS package name that this package needs at
execution-time.  For system packages, the rosdep key will normally
*not* specify the "development" package, so it will generally lack the
``"-dev"`` suffix.

The ``<exec_depend>`` is needed for packages providing shared
libraries, executable commands, Python modules, launch scripts or any
other files required for running your package.  It is also used by
metapackages for grouping packages.

Attributes
..........

 The same attributes as for `\<build_depend\> (multiple)`_.


<depend> (multiple)
'''''''''''''''''''

Declares a rosdep key or ROS package name that this package needs for
multiple reasons.  A ``<depend>`` tag is equivalent to specifying
``<build_depend>``, ``<build_export_depend>`` and ``<exec_depend>``,
all on the same package or key.  The ``<depend>`` tag cannot be used
in combination with any of the three equivalent tags for the same
package or key name.

Attributes
..........

 The same attributes as for `\<build_depend\> (multiple)`_.


<doc_depend> (multiple)
'''''''''''''''''''''''

Declares a rosdep key or ROS package name that your package needs for
building its documentation.  A ``<doc_depend>`` *may* reference a
package also declared as some other type of dependency.

The current version of the buildsystem does not provide any
documentation specific functionality or targets but may do so in the
future, similar to how the unit tests are integrated into the configure
and make steps.  Other infrastructure (like the documentation jobs on
the buildfarm) will utilize these additional doc dependencies.

Generated Debian packages are built without the documentation or the
documentation dependencies.

Attributes
..........

 The same attributes as for `\<build_depend\> (multiple)`_.


<test_depend> (multiple)
''''''''''''''''''''''''

Declares a rosdep key or ROS package name that your package needs
for running its unit tests.  A ``<test_depend>`` *may* reference a
package also declared as some other type of dependency.

All tests and their dependencies will be built if the CMake variables
``CATKIN_ENABLE_TESTING=1`` and ``CATKIN_SKIP_TESTING=0``, the default
settings. ``CMakeLists.txt`` should only define its test targets when
``CATKIN_ENABLE_TESTING=1`` [9]_.

When building with testing enabled, the ``<test_depend>`` packages are
available for configuring and building the tests as well as running
them.  Generated Debian packages are built without the unit tests or
their dependencies.

Attributes
..........

 The same attributes as for `\<build_depend\> (multiple)`_.


<conflict> (multiple)
'''''''''''''''''''''

Declares a rosdep key or ROS package name with which your package
conflicts.  This package and the conflicting package should not be
installed at the same time.  This has no effect on source builds, but
maps to ``Conflicts`` when creating Debian or RPM packages.

For a detailed explanation how these relationships are used see
[4]_ and [5]_.

Attributes
..........

 The same attributes as for `\<build_depend\> (multiple)`_.


<replace> (multiple)
''''''''''''''''''''

Declares a rosdep key or ROS package name that your package replaces.
This has no effect on source builds, but maps to ``Replaces`` when
creating Debian packages and ``Obsoletes`` for RPM packages.

Attributes
..........

 The same attributes as for `\<build_depend\> (multiple)`_.


.. raw:: html

  <font color="red">


Group dependency tags
---------------------

<group_depend> (multiple)
'''''''''''''''''''''''''

The content is the name of a dependency group on which the package depends.
The group name should follow the same rules as the `\<name\>`_ tag.

Attributes
..........

 The `condition` attribute as defined for `\<build_depend\> (multiple)`_.

<member_of_group> (multiple)
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The content is the name of a dependency group of which the package is a member.

Attributes
..........

 The `condition` attribute as defined for `\<build_depend\> (multiple)`_.

.. raw:: html

  </font>


<export>
--------

This tag serves as a container for additional information various
packages and subsystems need to embed.  To avoid potential collisions,
an export tag should have the same name as the package which is meant
to process it.  The content of that tag is up to the package to define
and use.

Existing rosbuild export tags for tools using ``pluginlib`` remain
unchanged.  For example, a package which implements an rviz plugin
might include this::

  <export>
    <rviz plugin="${prefix}/plugin_description.xml"/>
  </export>

The following are some tags used within an ``<export>`` for various
package and message generation tasks.

<architecture_independent/>
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''

This empty tag indicates that your package produces no
architecture-specific files once built.
That information is intended for allowing optimization of packaging.

Specifying ``<architecture_independent/>`` is recommended for
metapackages and for packages defining only ROS messages and services.
Python-only packages are reasonable candidates, too.
It is not appropriate for any package which compiles C or C++ code.

Be sure to remove this tag if some subsequent update adds
architecture-dependent targets to a formerly independent package.

.. raw:: html

  <font color="red">

<build_type> (multiple)
'''''''''''''''''''''''

.. raw:: html

  </font>

Various tools use this tag to determine how to handle a package.  It
was defined in REP-0134 [10]_, which currently specifies only two
valid values::

  <build_type>catkin</build_type>
  <build_type>cmake</build_type>

If no ``<build_type>`` is provided, ``catkin`` is assumed.

When the build type is ``cmake``, the package is handled as a
non-catkin CMake project.  It cannot be included in a normal catkin
workspace, but can instead use ``catkin_make_isolated``, which
configures and builds a different kind of workspace in which
``cmake``, ``make``, and ``make install`` are invoked separately for
each package.  See REP-0134 for details.

Only one build type should be active after conditions are evaluated.
If multiple are active then the last build type is to be used.

Further build types may eventually be defined, such as: "make",
"autotools", "rosbuild", or "custom".

.. raw:: html

  <font color="red">

Attributes
..........

 The `condition` attribute as defined for `\<build_depend\> (multiple)`_.

.. raw:: html

  </font>

<deprecated>
''''''''''''

This tag indicates that your package is deprecated, enabling tools to
notify users about that fact.  The tag may be empty or may optionally
contain an arbitrary text providing user more information about the
deprecation::

  <export>
    <deprecated>
      This package will be removed in ROS Hydro. Instead, use package
      FOO, which provides similar features with a different API.
    </deprecated>
  </export>

<message_generator>
'''''''''''''''''''

The content defines the *identifier* for the language bindings
generated by this package, i.e. in ``gencpp`` this is set to ``cpp``::

  <export>
    <message_generator>cpp</message_generator>
  </export>

<metapackage/>
''''''''''''''

This empty tag declares a special kind of catkin package used for
grouping other packages.  Metapackages only provide execution-time
dependencies.  They cannot be used for catkin builds and compile
nothing themselves.  Metapackages may not install any code or other
files, although ``package.xml`` does get installed automatically.
They can depend on other metapackages, but regular catkin packages
cannot.

A good use for metapackages is to group the major components of your
robot and then provide a comprehensive grouping for your whole system.
Package installation tools like ``apt-get`` or ``yum`` can
automatically install all the packages on which a metapackage directly
or indirectly depends.  Metapackages can also be used to resolve
dependencies declared by legacy rosbuild stacks not yet converted to
catkin.

Every metapackage must have a ``CMakeLists.txt`` containing these
commands::

  cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 2.8.3)
  project(PACKAGE_NAME)
  find_package(catkin REQUIRED)
  catkin_metapackage()

Because the metapackage ``CMakeLists.txt`` contains a catkin macro,
its ``package.xml`` must declare a buildtool dependency on catkin::

  <buildtool_depend>catkin</buildtool_depend>

Additional buildtool, build or test dependencies are not permitted.

Because metapackages only supply execution-time dependencies, they use
``<exec_depend>`` to list the packages in their group::

  <exec_depend>your_custom_msgs</exec_depend>
  <exec_depend>your_server_node</exec_depend>
  <exec_depend>your_utils</exec_depend>
  <exec_depend>another_metapackage</exec_depend>


.. raw:: html

  <font color="red">

Related Changes
===============

Environment variables
---------------------

In order to identify the ROS distribution ROS 1 already defines an environment
variable `ROS_DISTRO` ([17]_).
ROS 2 should expose the same environment variable.
The package exporting the necessary environment should be a dependency of
almost all ROS 2 packages to ensure that the information is available even when
only some packages are installed.
The package `rcl` seems to be a good place for this.

Additionally for the condition expressions to allow distinguishing ROS 1 and
ROS 2 an environment variable identifying the major version is necessary.
Therefore the environment variable `ROS_VERSION` is used with the value being
either `1` or `2`.
This new environment variable can be defined beside the `ROS_DISTRO` one.

An additional environment variable `ROS_PYTHON_VERSION` to choose the Python
version in use (either `2` or `3`) is also provided.
In ROS 1, this allows users to test out packages on Python 3 before the
distribution is officially switched to Python 3.
ROS 2 only supports Python 3, so changing this environment variable there will
cause tools like rosdep to stop working.

Once a specific ROS environment has been sourced all tools can determine the
ROS major version as well as the distribution name and therefore evaluate
conditions which use those to limit the scope of dependencies.

If no environment has been sourced some tools might require that the necessary
information is being specified explicitly when being invoked.

New ROS package
'''''''''''''''

In ROS 1 the environment variable `ROS_DISTRO` is being set in the `roslib`
package which also defines other environment variables like `ROS_PACKAGE_PATH`.
In ROS 2 the environment variable `ROS_DISTRO` doesn't exist at the moment.
Also neither ROS version has an environment variable `ROS_VERSION` at the
moment.

A new ROS package named `ros_environment` which has minimal dependencies will
be available in both ROS versions and providing the new environment variables
as well as some of the existing environment variables.

Compatibility
=============

Support for format three
------------------------

Existing tools supporting up to format two will need to be updated to
honor the new information provided by format three.
If they are not checking that the format is two or lower they will
simply ignore the format three specific information when processing a
package with a format three manifest.

In order to enable packages to declare different dependencies for ROS 1 and ROS
2 in a single manifest the tools in ROS 1 (`catkin_pkg`, `rosdep`, `bloom`,
etc.) should be updated to support format 3.

catkin_prepare_release
''''''''''''''''''''''

As long as a manifest doesn't specify a `compatibility` version the tools
doesn't need to change.
For packages which do specify a `compatibility` version the tool should
probably by default remove the attribute and only after confirmation from
the user offer to keep it.

ros_buildfarm
'''''''''''''

The dependencies between packages is directly mapped to upstream /
downstream jobs in Jenkins.
In order to consider the `compatibility` attribute the downstream job
dependencies must be changed to be conditional which are only triggered
when the new package version is not compatible to the previous version.


Backward compatibility
----------------------

Format one or two packages following REP-0127 [1]_ or REP-0140 [12]_ are
not affected unless they are updated to declare ``<package format="3">``.

Since format three only adds new functionality and doesn't modify any
existing markup a migration to format three only makes sense when the
package wants to use any of the new features.

.. raw:: html

  </font>


Schema
======

.. raw:: html

  <font color="blue">

A schema defining the structure specified in this document is available
at [11]_.
To specify the schema within a manifest you can reference a self
contained schema file like this:

  <?xml version="1.0"?>
  <?xml-model href="http://download.ros.org/schema/package_format3.xsd" schematypens="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"?>
  <package format="3">

.. raw:: html

  </font>


References
==========

.. [1] REP-0127
   (https://ros.org/reps/rep-0127.html)
.. [2] ROS naming conventions
   (http://www.ros.org/wiki/ROS/Patterns/Conventions#Naming_ROS_Resources)
.. [3] ros-infrastructure/catkin_pkg#43: `"add support for depend tag"
   <https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/catkin_pkg/pull/43>`_
.. [4] Declaring relationships between packages (Debian Policy Manual)
   (http://www.debian.org/doc/debian-policy/ch-relationships.html)
.. [5] Advanced RPM Packaging (Fedora Documentation)
   (http://docs.fedoraproject.org/en-US/Fedora_Draft_Documentation/0.1/html/RPM_Guide/ch-advanced-packaging.html)
.. [6] Buildsystem mailing list discussion: `"adding <depend> syntax to package.xml"
   <https://groups.google.com/forum/?fromgroups=#!topic/ros-sig-buildsystem/j47jBnpEUnI>`_
.. [7] Buildsystem mailing list discussion: `"Dependency tag types for REP 127"
   <https://groups.google.com/forum/?fromgroups=#!topic/ros-sig-buildsystem/fXGSZG0SC08>`_
.. [8] Buildsystem mailing list discussion: `"dev/non-dev packages and required meta information"
   <https://groups.google.com/forum/?fromgroups=#!topic/ros-sig-buildsystem/HKgOrdu1OO0>`_
.. [9] Buildsystem mailing list discussion: `"REP-0140: internal review"
   <https://groups.google.com/forum/?fromgroups=#!topic/ros-sig-buildsystem/_QVFLQi-6wk>`_
.. [10] REP-0134
   (https://ros.org/reps/rep-0134.html)
.. [11] Schema file
   (https://github.com/ros-infrastructure/rep/blob/master/xsd/package_format3.xsd)
.. [12] REP-0140
   (https://ros.org/reps/rep-0140.html)
.. [13] Discussion on REP-0127
   (https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/ros-sig-buildsystem/_jRvhXFfsVk)
.. [14] Related topic of versioning ROS libraries
   (https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/ros-sig-buildsystem/Q9BK3MGFY_U)
.. [15] SO versioning from a package perspective
   (https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/ros-sig-buildsystem/jTB9r3zu580)
.. [16] REP-0143
   (https://ros.org/reps/rep-0143.html)
.. [17] ROS_DISTRO environment variable
  (https://github.com/ros/ros/blob/b202645dc6bea6d4b9ca408dc703c8c7cc8204d9/core/roslib/env-hooks/10.ros.sh.em#L16)


Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.

.. raw:: html

  <font color="red">

Appendix
========

Alternatives for Universal Packages
-----------------------------------

One option is to not allow different dependencies depending on the ROS version.
For example, a package that depends on `roscpp` in ROS 1 and `rclcpp` in ROS 2 would depend on `roscpp`.
ROS 2 would have a dummy packcage called `roscpp` that depended on `rclcpp`.
That would allow all downstream packages to use a single name as their dependency.

This option was not chosen because it would be burdensome to create dummy packages for every naming difference between ROS 1 and ROS 2.
It is even more cumbersome if a package needs to declare a dependency only in one of the ROS versions.
There would be a dummy package in both ROS version where one is empty and the other declares a dependency.

.. raw:: html

  </font>

..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
