REP: 2136
Title: Dependencies on Third Party Packages in ROS 2
Author: Michael Carroll <mjcarroll@intrinsic.ai>
Status: Draft
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 24-July-2024
Post-History: 24-July-2024

Abstract
========

This REP forms the recommendation for how to manage dependencies on non-ROS third-party packages. Specifically, this REP aims to provide recommendations on how to modify and package a dependency as well as when to create a vendored third-party package to be released in a ROS distribution, in the event that the third party package cannot be released in a ROS distribution agnostic manner.

Motivation
==========

In this context, a third-party package is a software package that exists outside of the ROS ecosystem, is used by packages in the ROS ecosystem, but is not released widely as a system dependency. There are a few scenarios where this may happen:

* A package is not available from package managers on all supported platforms.
* Versions are inconsistent across package managers on all supported platforms.
* A package is distributed via PPA or alternative packaging mechanism.
* A package is only provided from source repositories.

There are additional constraints when distributing ROS packages (either source or binary) that are intended to be used by downstream users:

* In order for a ROS package to be supported on all supported platforms, all dependencies of that package must be available through that platform’s package manager or via other ROS packages in the distribution.
* In order for a ROS package to be released as a binary via the buildfarm, all dependencies of that package must be available from either upstream Ubuntu or via other ROS packages in the distribution.


Available Solutions
===================
