REP: 150
Title: ROS Melodic and Newer Metapackages
Author: Tully Foote <tfoote@openrobotics.org>, Chris Lalancette <clalancette@openrobotics.org>
Status: Active
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 03-Nov-2017
Post-History:


Abstract
========

This REP describes the metapackages for the ROS Melodic release and for releases that follow until otherwise replaced by a similar update REP.
This REP updates REP 131 [3]_ and REP 142 [5]_ for changes in packages.


Motivation
==========

For a discussion on the general motivation and role of variants,
please see REP 108 [1]_.

As of ROS Hydro we have completed the transition to using
metapackages instead of variants.
For more information on metapackages see REP 127 [2]_.

This document covers the common metapackages used for recommended
installations.
It is expressed in the ros/metapackages repository on github.com
[4]_.

This REP proposes the same entrypoints as REP 108 and merely updates
the variant definitions to reflect the organizational changes in ROS
stacks.
In particular, in ROS Melodic the `robot` metapackage is contracted to remove
`robot_model` and instead explicitly list the necessary packages.

The definitions in this REP are more focused and concise for clearer
purpose, and do not list all transitive dependencies explicitly.


Specification
=============

End-user entry points
---------------------

We define the same three main entry points for ROS users as REP 108
[1]_.

 * desktop_full (recommended)
 * desktop
 * ros_base

Metapackages
------------

ROS Core
''''''''

The `ros_core` metapackage composes the core communication protocols.
It may not contain any GUI dependencies.

::

 - ros_core:
      extends: [ros, ros_comm]
      packages: [catkin, cmake_modules, common_msgs, gencpp, geneus, genlisp,
                 genmsg, gennodejs, genpy, message_generation, message_runtime,
                 rosbag_migration_rule, rosconsole_bridge, rosconsole_bridge,
                 roscpp_core, roslisp, rospack, std_msgs]

ROS Base
''''''''

The `ros_base` metapackage composes the `ros_core` metapackage with
commonly used libraries.
It may not contain any GUI dependencies.

::

  - ros_base:
      extends: [ros_core]
      packages: [actionlib, bond_core, class_loader,
                 dynamic_reconfigure, nodelet_core,
                 pluginlib]

Robot metapackage
'''''''''''''''''

The `robot` metapackage is defined to be core, stable, ROS libraries
for any robot hardware.
It is the "general robotics" libraries of ROS.
It may not contain any GUI dependencies.

::

  - robot:
      extends: [ros_base]
      packages: [control_msgs, diagnostics, executive_smach, filters, geometry,
                 joint_state_publisher, kdl_parser, kdl_parser_py,
                 robot_state_publisher, urdf, urdf_parser_plugin, xacro]

Capability variants
'''''''''''''''''''

The capability variants organize commonly used libraries that are
specific to a class of use case.
We also define a `simulators` variant that provides an organizational
role for higher-level variants.
We discourage GUI dependencies in these stacks, if possible.

::

  - perception:
      extends: [ros_base]
      packages: [image_common, image_pipeline,
                 image_transport_plugins, laser_pipeline,
                 perception_pcl, vision_opencv]

  - simulators:
      extends: [robot]
      packages: [gazebo_ros_pkgs, rqt_common_plugins, rqt_robot_plugins,
                 stage_ros]

  - viz:
      extends: [ros_base]
      packages: [rqt_common_plugins, rqt_robot_plugins, rviz]

Desktop variants
''''''''''''''''

The `desktop` variants are main entry points for users.
The `desktop_full` is a "batteries included" experience for users and
attempts to collect stable, well-documented libraries.
These libraries may be specific to certain classes of robots, such as
mobile robots, though they are not specific to a particular robot.
The `desktop` variant is more minimal and only provides the stacks in
the `robot` variant, plus visualization and debugging tools.
Both of these variants contain tutorials for the stacks they provide.

::

  - desktop:
      extends: [robot, viz]
      packages: [common_tutorials, geometry_tutorials, ros_tutorials,
                 roslint, urdf_tutorial, visualization_tutorials]
  - desktop_full:
      extends: [desktop, perception, simulators]
      packages: [urdf_sim_tutorial]

Institution-specific and robot-specific
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Please see REP 108 [1]_ for discussion of institution-specific
metapackages.

When creating robot or institution specific metapackages consider
using the \*_robot and \*_desktop and \*_base form where * is the
institution or robot name.

An institution is not required to provide a metapackage, they are
mainly provided for convenience and identity.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

The metapackages in this REP provide the same semantic top level
entry points while simplifying the definitions.


References
==========

.. [1] REP 108: Diamondback Variants
   (http://www.ros.org/reps/rep-0108.html)

.. [2] REP 127: Specification of package manifest format
   (http://ros.org/reps/rep-0127.html)

.. [3] REP 131: Groovy Variants
   (http://www.ros.org/reps/rep-0131.html)

.. [4] ROS Metapackages Repository
   (https://github.com/ros/metapackages)

.. [5] REP 142: Indigo Variants
   (http://www.ros.org/reps/rep-0142.html)


Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.


..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
