REP: 3
Title: Target Platforms
Author: Tully Foote <tfoote@willowgarage.com>, Ken Conley <kwc@willowgarage.com>
Status: Active
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 21-Sep-2010
Post-History: 21-Sep-2010, 17-Jan-2011, 13-Jan-2015


Abstract
========

This REP defines target platforms for each ROS Distribution Release.
We define platforms to include both operating system releases (e.g. Ubuntu
Trusty (14.04 LTS)) as well as major language releases (e.g. Python 2.7). The
target platforms represent the set on which all core stacks are
expected to work. Exceptions can be made for stacks that are
intentionally platform-specific.

Platforms by Distribution
=========================

If planned support for a target platform is changed, notice will be
sent to ros-developers to enable discussion of this issue.

Box Turtle (Feb 2010)
---------------------
- Ubuntu Hardy (8.04 LTS)
- Ubuntu Intrepid (8.10)
- Ubuntu Jaunty (9.04)
- Ubuntu Karmic (9.10)
- C++03
- Boost 1.37
- Lisp SBCL 1.0.38
- Python 2.5

C Turtle (Aug 2010)
-------------------
- Ubuntu Jaunty (9.04)
- Ubuntu Karmic (9.10)
- Ubuntu Lucid (10.04 LTS)
- Ubuntu Maverick (10.10)
- C++03
- Boost 1.37
- Lisp SBCL 1.0.38
- Python 2.5

Diamondback (Feb 2011)
----------------------
- Ubuntu Lucid (10.04 LTS)
- Ubuntu Maverick (10.10)
- Ubuntu Natty (11.04)
- C++03
- Boost 1.40
- Lisp SBCL 1.0.38
- Python 2.6

Electric Emys (Aug 2011)
------------------------
- Ubuntu Lucid (10.04 LTS)
- Ubuntu Maverick (10.10)
- Ubuntu Natty (11.04)
- Ubuntu Oneiric (11.10)
- C++03
- Boost 1.40
- Lisp SBCL 1.0.x
- Python 2.6

Fuerte Turtle (Mar 2012)
------------------------
- Ubuntu Lucid (10.04 LTS)
- Ubuntu Oneiric (11.10)
- Ubuntu Precise (12.04 LTS)
- C++03
- Boost 1.40
- Lisp SBCL 1.0.x
- Python 2.6

- a first version of catkin has been introduces but it is not recommended to be used by packages other then in the ROS core

Groovy Galapagos (Oct 2012)
---------------------------
- Ubuntu Oneiric (11.10)
- Ubuntu Precise (12.04 LTS)
- Ubuntu Quantal (12.10)
- C++03
- Boost 1.46
- Lisp SBCL 1.0.x
- Python 2.7
- CMake 2.8.3

- catkin has been officially introduced
- the ROS buildfarm supports releasing, documenting and continuous integration testing packages which are based on either catkin or rosbuild

Hydro Medusa (Aug 2013)
-----------------------
- Ubuntu Precise (12.04 LTS)
- Ubuntu Quantal (12.10)
- Ubuntu Raring (13.04)
- C++03
- Boost 1.48
- Lisp SBCL 1.0.x
- Python 2.7
- CMake 2.8.3

- the ROS buildfarm supports:
  - releasing only catkin-based packages
  - documenting and continuous integration testing packages which are based on either catkin or rosbuild
- rosbuild-based packages can still be built from source


Indigo Igloo (May 2014)
-----------------------
- Ubuntu Saucy (13.10)
- Ubuntu Trusty (14.04 LTS)
- C++03
- Boost 1.53
- Lisp SBCL 1.0.x
- Python 2.7 (Additional testing against Python 3.3 recommended)
- CMake 2.8.11

- the ROS buildfarm supports:
  - releasing, documenting and continuous integration testing only catkin-based packages
- rosbuild-based packages can still be built from source

Jade Turtle (May 2015 - May 2017)
---------------------------------
Required Support for:
- Ubuntu Trusty (14.04)
- Ubuntu Utopic (14.10)
- Ubuntu Vivid (15.04)

Minimum Requirements:
- C++03
- Python 2.7 (Python 3.3 not required, but testing against it is recommended)
- Lisp SBCL 1.1.14
- CMake 2.8.12
- Boost 1.54

Exact or Series Requirements:
- Ogre3D 1.8.x (Trusty)
- Ogre3D 1.9.x (Other Systems)
- Gazebo 5
- PCL 1.7.x
- OpenCV 2.4.x

- Buildsystem support:
 - catkin: build from source, release for binary packaging, wiki documentation, continuous integration
 - rosbuild: build from source

Motivation
==========

This document is provided to help plan future development for
libraries. The primary platforms for ROS are Canonical's Ubuntu
releases, and our intent is to track these releases as best as
possible while also allowing for current, thirdparty libraries to be
used.

Rationale
=========

Target platforms for future releases are speculative and are based on
consulting Ubuntu's release and end-of-life schedule [1]_.

These targets, including starting and ending support dates, are based on the Distribution Timeline to meet minimum requirements. [3]_

C++
---

We use the C++03 (ISO/IEC 14882:2003) standard, and are compiler-agnostic.
While we mainly develop with gcc, no use of compiler-specific features is allowed
without proper use of macros to allow use on other platforms.

Use of C++[0|1]x or tr1 features are only allowed if support for that feature is checked
at compile time, and equivalent functionality exists without requiring C++[0|1]x
code.  A wholesale jump to C++[0|1]x will not happen until all commonly used
OS platforms fully support it.

For a given release we allow use of Boost libraries that match the version provided in our
low-water-mark Ubuntu version.

Lisp
----

We use Steel Bank Common Lisp as our ANSI Common Lisp
implementation. We are currently tracking SBCL 1.0.38 and will track
future updates in the 1.0.x series as appropriate.

Python
------

Our intent with Python is to track the minimum version provided in the
supported Ubuntu platforms, as well as survey other commonly used OS
platforms that support ROS to determine a reasonable minimum target.

Ubuntu has announced plans to release 14.04 in April 2014 with Python
3 as its default interpreter. Some ROS infrastructure and core scripts
already work with Python 3 since Groovy. But, it remains difficult to
set up a test environment so ROS package developers can also port to
Python 3.

The preferred migration strategy is to support both Python 2.7 and
Python >= 3.2 in each source script. Supporting any version earlier
than 2.6 makes that task harder. Python 3.0 and 3.1 will probably
never be supported explicitly, although some things may work.

catkin / rosbuild support
=========================

catkin was officially introduced in Groovy beside rosbuild.

Since even half a year after the Hydro release not a single rosbuild-based
package was released the support for building Debian packages of rosbuild-based
packages has been discontinued in Hydro.

As of Indigo the ROS buildfarm also only supports documenting and continuous
integration testing of catkin-based packages.
Since Indigo is a LTS release and aims to be supported for several years
maintaining the legacy code for rosbuild-based packages seems to be
impractical.

rosbuild-based packages can still be built from source (which should also be
supported in upcoming ROS distributions).

Core Stacks
===========

Core stacks are required to comply with the target platforms listed
here, though exceptions can be granted for core stacks that are
inherently platform-specific.  The set of core stacks is currently
defined by variants included with each ROS distribution release.

C Turtle
--------

This REP applies to stacks in the `base` variant for C Turtle.

Diamondback
-----------

This REP applies to stacks in the `desktop-extras` variant [2]_ for Diamondback.

Non-core Stacks
===============

    And thirdly, the code is more what you'd call "guidelines" than actual rules...

We hope that ROS stack maintainers will make every effort to comply
with the target platforms within this REP, but we recognize that ROS
stacks represent a spectrum of development, from research prototypes
to hardened libraries.  There are also cases where supporting target
platforms may incur unnecessary effort, such as a set of drivers for a
specific robot platform.

References and Footnotes
========================

.. [1] Ubuntu Releases with End-of-Life Dates
   (https://wiki.ubuntu.com/Releases)

.. [2] REP 108, ROS Diamondback Variants
   (http://www.ros.org/reps/rep-0108.html)

.. [3] Distribution Timeline
   (http://wiki.ros.org/Distributions/Timeline)

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.

..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
