REP: 2000
Title: ROS 2.0 Target Platforms
Author: Mikael Arguedas <mikael@openrobotics.org>
Status: Draft
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 10-Apr-2018


Abstract
========

This REP defines target platforms for each ROS 2.0 Distribution Release.
We define platforms to include both operating system releases (e.g. Ubuntu Xenial (16.04 LTS)) as well as major language releases (e.g. Python 3.5).
The target platforms represent the set on which all core stacks are expected to work.
Exceptions can be made for stacks that are intentionally platform-specific.

Platforms by Distribution
=========================

If planned support for a target platform is changed, notice will be sent to discourse to enable discussion of this issue.

Ardent Apalone (December 2017 - December 2018)
----------------------------------------------

+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|                                     Required support                                         |
+--------------+-----------------------+------------------------------+------------------------+
| Architecture | Ubuntu Xenial (16.04) |     MacOS Sierra (10.12)     |   Windows 10 (VS2015)  |
+==============+=======================+==============================+========================+
|    amd64     |          X            |             X                |          X             |
+--------------+-----------------------+------------------------------+------------------------+
|    arm64     |          X            |                              |                        |
+--------------+-----------------------+------------------------------+------------------------+

Minumum language requirements:

- C++14
- Python 3.5


Dependency Requirements:


+---------+---------------+---------------+----------------+
| Package | Ubuntu Xenial |     MacOS**   |   Windows 10** |
+=========+===============+===============+================+
| CMake   |     3.5.1     |     3.11.0    |     3.10.2     |
+---------+---------------+---------------+----------------+
| EmPY    |     3.3.2     |     3.6.5     |     3.3.2      |
+---------+---------------+---------------+----------------+
| Poco    |     1.7.7*    |     1.7.7*    |     1.7.7*     |
+---------+---------------+---------------+----------------+
| Python  |     3.5.1     |     3.6.5     |     3.6.4      |
+---------+---------------+---------------+----------------+
| Ogre    |     1.10*     |     1.10*     |     1.10*      |
+---------+---------------+---------------+----------------+
| OpenCV  |     2.4.9     |     3.4.1     |     2.4.13.2*  |
+---------+---------------+---------------+----------------+

" * " means that this is not the upstream version (available on the official Operating System repositories) but a package distributed by OSRF or the community (package built and distributed on custom repositories).

" ** " Rolling distributions will see multiple version changes of these dependencies during their lifetime.

This document only captures the version at the first release of a ROS distribution and will not be updated as the dependencies move forward.
These versions are thus a low watermark.


Package manager use for dependencies:

- Ubuntu Xenial: apt
- MacOS: Homebrew, pip
- Windows: Chocolatey, pip


Build System Support:

- ament
- cmake
- setuptools


Motivation
==========

This document is provided to help plan future development for libraries.
The primary platforms for ROS 2.0 are Canonical's Ubuntu releases, and our intent is to track these releases as best as possible while also allowing for current, thirdparty libraries to be used.
MacOS and Windows being rolling distributions, ROS 2.0 will target the latest state of these distributions at the time of the release.

Rationale
=========

Target platforms for future releases are speculative and are based on consulting Ubuntu's release and end-of-life schedule [1]_.


References and Footnotes
========================

.. [1] Ubuntu Releases with End-of-Life Dates
   (https://wiki.ubuntu.com/Releases)

Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.

..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
