REP: 129
Title: Node API for SLAM Packages
Author: Stéphane Magnenat <stephane at magnenat dot net>
Status: Draft
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 16-Oct-2012
Post-History: 


Abstract
========

This REP standardizes 2D and 3D mapping node API, to allow easy
interoperability between different Simultaneous Localization and
Mappping (SLAM) implementations.
This document defines names and types for topics, services and parameters.
Moreover, it partially defines the semantics of message content,
for instance in the case of point clouds.
To ease the compliance curve, this REP defines several compliance profiles.


Motivation
==========

Localization and mapping is a cornerstone of modern robotic applications.
While the SLAM problem has been solved in research papers for a variety of
situations, on the practical side it is still not trivial to deploy a robust
SLAM on real applications.
For this reason, and because every solution has its own strong and weak
points, there are different SLAM implementations available on ROS, most
of them do 2D, but there are several that do 3D.
Unfortunately, these implementations do not share the same node API,
which hinders their comparison and puts unnecessary burden on the user,
who typically want to test different approaches and use the one working
the best for her application.
The aim of this REP is to specify a node API for 2D and 3D SLAM nodes.
This specification builds on the de-facto partial standard in 2D SLAMs on ROS,
and extends it to 3D.
In addition, it defines a companion node that provides commonly desired
features such as regions of interest and 2D projections of 3D maps.


Specification
=============

General Architecture
--------------------

The node API for SLAM packages should minimize the necessary work for the
node developers, while at the same time provide a rich set of features
to users.
For this reason, we propose to split the functionality into two entities:
the SLAM node and a map dispatcher node::

    ---->   +---------------+ ---->
    scans,  |               | poses (tf)    +----------------+ <--->
    point   |   SLAM node   |               |                | ROI sub maps
    clouds  |               | ------------> | map_dispatcher | 
            +---------------+ map           |                | <--->
                                            +----------------+ projected maps

SLAM node
    This node is responsible of localizing the robot and providing a simple
    map, optionally with progressive updates.

map_dispatcher
    This node receives the map from the SLAM node, and provides sub maps
    based on regions of interest (ROI) and projected 2D maps from 3D data.

This split allows to implement ``map_dispatcher`` once and use it with all
SLAM nodes.
This strategy also keeps a low entry barrier to write a new compliant
SLAM node.


Compliance Profiles
-------------------

A profile defines a set of features that make sense to bundle together.
A node should provide all features defined in the profile to comply with
the profile.
In that case, the node is said to *implement* the profile.
The following profiles are defined:

2D
    The minimal features to perform 2D SLAM on a robot.
    The node shall provide an ``OccupancyGrid`` map.

3D
    The minimal features to perform 3D SLAM on a robot.
    The node shall provide a ``PointCloud2`` map, consisting of points
    at the boundary between free space and obstacles.
    The point cloud must at least provide channels ``x``, ``y``, and ``z``.

3DO
    In 3D, the ability to send octree centers in addition to point maps.
    The node shall provide a ``PointCloud2`` map, consisting of points
    at the centers of obstacle cuboids, with the field ``size`` being the
    length of its side.
    We call point-cloud maps with this semantic the
    *octree point-cloud format*.
    
P2D
    Progressive 2D map, the ability to update parts of the map without sending
    the whole map.
    The node shall send ``OccupancyGridUpdate`` updates, that will replace
    parts of the target map.
    
P3D
    Progressive 3D map, the ability to update parts of the point map without
    sending the whole map.
    The node shall send ``PointCloud2Update`` updates, that will either add
    or delete information to the target map.

P3DO
    Progressive octree map, the ability to update parts of the octree map
    without sending the whole map.
    The node shall send ``PointCloud2Update`` updates, that will either add
    or delete information to the target map.

A 2D node shall implement at least the complete 2D profile.
If so, the node is said to be "REP-129: 2D" compliant.
A 3D node shall implement at least the complete 3D profile.
A node implementing 3D and octree maps, including progressive updates,
is said to be "REP-129: 3D, P3D, 3DO, P3DO" compliant.


Message Types
-------------

The following types of messages are implemented in the supporting map_msgs_
unary stack:


map_msgs/OccupancyGridUpdate.msg
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

This message contains an update to an occupancy-grid map.
Its data field has a similar semantics to the one in ``OccupancyGrid.msg``.
This field shall have ``width`` x ``height`` elements.
The resolution is similar to the existing map, and the update replaces
values in the Axis-Aligned Bounding-Box (AABB) starting at (``x``, ``y``)
and of size (``width``, ``height``).
If the target node does not have a map yet, or if any message was missed
since sequence number (``header.seq``) was 0, this message is to be
discarded::

    Header header
    int32 x
    int32 y
    uint32 width
    uint32 height
    int8[] data


map_msgs/PointCloud2Update.msg
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

This message contains an update to a point-cloud map.
If the update is an addition, the given points shall be added to the existing
cloud.
If the channels content do not match, missing channels shall be filled with the
default-constructed corresponding value, and excessive channels shall be dropped.
The point cloud must at least provide channels ``x``, ``y``, and ``z``.
If the target node does not have a point-cloud map yet, or if any message
was missed since sequence number (``header.seq``) was 0, this message is to be
discarded::

    uint32 ADD=0
    uint32 DELETE=1
    Header header
    uint32 type          # type of update, one of ADD or DELETE
    sensor_msgs/PointCloud2 points


map_msgs/ProjectedMap.msg
'''''''''''''''''''''''''

This message contains the projection of a slice of a 3D point-cloud map
onto a 2D occupancy grid.
The map was projected along the z-axis in the ``map.header.frame_id`` frame,
in the range of ``min_z`` to ``max_z``::

    nav_msgs/OccupancyGrid map
    float64 min_z
    float64 max_z


map_msgs/ProjectedMapInfo.msg
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

This message contains all information to set a projection from a slice of a
3D point-cloud map onto a 2D occupancy grid.
The map will be projected along the z-axis using points in the range of
``min_z`` to ``max_z`` in the frame ``map.header.frame_id``, from the area
defined by the AABB starting at (``x``, ``y``) and of
size (``width``, ``height``)::

    string frame_id
    float64 x
    float64 y
    float64 width
    float64 height
    float64 min_z
    float64 max_z

    
Service Types
-------------

map_msgs/SaveMap.srv
''''''''''''''''''''

This service allows to save a map. The type of the map is defined by the
extension of filename, and is allowed to be specific to the SLAM node::

    std_msgs/String filename


map_msgs/GetPointMap.srv
''''''''''''''''''''''''

This service returns the map as a point cloud::

    ---
    sensor_msgs/PointCloud2 map


map_msgs/SetMapProjections.srv
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

This service sets the different map projections::

    ---
    map_msgs/ProjectedMapInfo[] projected_maps_info


map_msg/GetMapROI.srv
'''''''''''''''''''''

This service retrieves a region of interest (ROI) from a 2D map.
The ``x``, ``y`` values are the center of the rectangular region of
lengths ``l_x``, ``l_y``.
The values are given relatively to the map frame::

    float64 x
    float64 y
    float64 l_x
    float64 l_y
    ---
    nav_msgs/OccupancyGrid sub_map
    
    
map_msg/GetPointMapROI.srv
''''''''''''''''''''''''''

This service retrieves a region of interest (ROI) from a 3D map.
The ``x``, ``y``, ``z`` values are the center of the region.
If the ``r`` value is strictly positive, the ROI is a sphere,
and if ``r`` is 0, the region is an axis-aligned bounding-box of
length ``l_x``, ``l_y``, ``l_z``.
The values are given relatively to the map frame::

    float64 x
    float64 y
    float64 z
    float64 r    # if != 0, circular ROI of radius r
    float64 l_x  # if r == 0, length of AABB on x
    float64 l_y  # if r == 0, length of AABB on y
    float64 l_z  # if r == 0, length of AABB on z
    ---
    sensor_msgs/PointCloud2 sub_map

Common SLAM Node API
--------------------

This section lists features that are common to nodes performing mapping in
2D or 3D.


Parameters
''''''''''

``~base_frame`` (string, default: "base_link", profile: 2D, 3D)
    the name of the base frame of the robot. This is the frame used for
    localization and for transformation of laser scan data or point clouds.
``~map_frame`` (string, default: "map", profile: 2D, 3D)
    the name of the map frame
``~odom_frame`` (string, default: "odom", profile: 2D, 3D)
    the name of the odom frame

The default values are set according to REP 105 [#REP105].
For nodes supporting both 2D and 3D, one or more node-specific parameters
shall allow to specify the mode or the topics to subscribe to.


Topics
''''''

SLAM nodes both subscribe to and publish on the tf topic, through the tf API.


Required tf Transforms
''''''''''''''''''''''

According to REP 105 [#REP105], the following transformations shall be
available to SLAM nodes.
The nodes might not use all of them, for instance,
ethzasl_mapping_ does not require base_frame.

<the frame attached to incoming scans/clouds> -> base_frame (profile: 2D, 3D)
    usually a fixed value, broadcast periodically by a robot_state_publisher,
    or a tf static_transform_publisher. 
base_frame -> odom_frame (profile: 2D, 3D)
    usually provided by the odometry system (e.g., the driver for the
    mobile base) 
    

Provided tf Transforms
''''''''''''''''''''''

According to REP 105 [#REP105], the SLAM nodes must provide at least 
this transform.
They are allowed to provide more, but they shall provide a setting
to disable additional published transforms.

map_frame -> odom_frame (profile: 2D, 3D)
    the current estimate of the robot's pose within the map frame


Services
''''''''

``~save_map`` (map_msgs/SaveMap, profile: 2D, 3D)
    Save the map to the filesystem, file type depends on extension in
    filename.
``~reset`` (std_msgs/Empty, profile: 2D, 3D)
    Clear the map and set the position to the origin.
    

2D Node API
-----------

The 2D node API is very similar to the one of existing packages such as
gmapping_ or hector_slam_.
See the `Backwards Compatibility`_ section for information about changes.


Subscribed Topics
'''''''''''''''''

``scan`` (sensor_msgs/LaserScan, profile: 2D)
    laser scans to create the map from

The node is allowed to subscribe to other sources of information in 2D.
For instance, `ethzasl_mapping`_ subscribes to ``cloud_in`` and accepts
2D point clouds.


Published Topics
''''''''''''''''

``map`` (nav_msgs/OccupancyGrid, latched, profile: 2D)
    generated map
``map_update`` (map_msgs/OccupancyGridUpdate, profile: P2D)
    updates of the map

If the node implements P2D, it can provide map updates between full maps.
The node shall still provide full maps at regular intervals.


Services
''''''''

``get_map`` (nav_msgs/GetMap, profile: 2D)
    Get the map.


3D Node API
-----------

Nodes providing 3D mapping have to provide a point-cloud map as output.
Point-cloud maps must provide at least channels ``x``, ``y``, ``z`` and are
allowed to provide additional channels such as normals and colors as well.
In the case of a SLAM algorithm based on point clouds, the clouds themselves,
possibly after filtering, shall be returned.
For algorithms working with octrees, one point shall be returned for every
face of the cuboids pointing to the sensor.
In addition, the center of the cuboids shall be returned, along with the size
of their side, on the topic ``octree_map``.


Subscribed Topics
'''''''''''''''''

``cloud_in`` (sensor_msgs/PointCloud2, profile: 3D)
    incoming 3D point cloud for scan integration.


Published Topics
''''''''''''''''

``point_map`` (sensor_msgs/PointCloud2, latched, profile: 3D)
    generated map in point-cloud format
``octree_map`` (sensor_msgs/PointCloud2, latched, profile: 3DO)
    generated octree map, in octree point-cloud format.
``point_map_update`` (map_msgs/PointCloud2Update, profile: P3D)
    updates of the point-cloud map
``octree_map_update`` (map_msgs/PointCloud2Update, profile: P3DO)
    updates of the octree map

If the node implements P3D or P3DO, it can provide map updates between
full maps.
The node shall still provide full maps at regular intervals.


Services
''''''''

``get_point_map`` (nav_msgs/GetPointMap, profile: 3D)
    Get the point-cloud map.
``get_octree_map`` (nav_msgs/GetPointMap, profile: 3DO)
    Get the octree map.

    
2D map_dispatcher API
---------------------

This node stores incoming occupancy-grid maps and allows third-party nodes
to retrieve parts of the map.
This node implements profiles 2D and 2DP.


Services
''''''''

``get_sub_map`` (map_msg/GetMapROI)
    Get part of the map.


3D map_dispatcher API
---------------------

This node stores incoming point-cloud maps and allows third-party nodes
to retrieve parts of the map and to set projections that will be
updated in real time while the underlying map changes.
This node implements profiles 3D, 3DP, 3DO, 3DPO.


Published Topics
''''''''''''''''

``projected_map_0 : projected_map_n-1`` (map_msgs/ProjectedMap, latched)
    projected 2D maps


Services
''''''''

``get_sub_point_map`` (map_msg/GetPointMapROI)
    Get part of the point-cloud map.
``get_sub_octree_map`` (map_msg/GetPointMapROI)
    Get part of the octree map, in octree point-cloud format.
``set_map_projections`` (map_msgs/SetMapProjections)
    Select the projections of the point-cloud map.


Open Questions
==============

* Map messages in 2D are currently in ``nav_msgs``, which is a bit strange. 
  As 3D map messages are in ``map_msgs``, this is a bit inconsistent.
  However, this simplest from a practical point of view is to live with this.
* Should we standardize additional channels for point clouds like normals, etc.?
  As far as I know there is no specification in ROS for channels within
  PointCloud2, although the usage in PCL might have set a de-facto standard.
* For octree maps, should the free space information be sent as well?
* For octree maps, do we want non-cubic voxel elements? (i.e. different
  dimensions on x,y,z).
* Should we use mapping or SLAM terminology in this REP? Right now I am using
  SLAM.
* Do we want a service, in addition to the topics, to get projected maps?
* Should we add services to only partially set the projections?
* Should we add a profile for multi-sensors inputs?
  

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

The changes to existing 2D SLAM nodes are the following:

* Renamed service ``dynamic_map`` to ``get_map`` for the sake of clarity.


Reference Implementation
========================

The map_msgs_ unary stack implements the messages and services specified
in this document.

Currently, only ethzasl_mapping_ explicitely aims at implementing the node
API defined in this REP.
We expect common ROS mapping stacks such as gmapping_, hector_slam_ and 
octomap_mapping_ to comply as well, once this REP is accepted.

A reference implementation of ``map_dispatcher``, both in 2D and 3D,
shall be available upon REP acceptance.

References
==========

.. _map_msgs: http://www.ros.org/wiki/map_msgs
.. _ethzasl_mapping: http://www.ros.org/wiki/ethzasl_mapping
.. _gmapping: http://www.ros.org/wiki/gmapping
.. _hector_slam: http://www.ros.org/wiki/hector_slam
.. _octomap_mapping: http://www.ros.org/wiki/octomap_mapping
.. [#REP105] REP 105, Coordinate Frames for Mobile Platforms
   (http://www.ros.org/reps/rep-0105.html)


Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.

Note: some text snippets were copied from ROS Wiki (CC-BY 3.0),
I think these are too small for being considered for copyright.