REP: 147
Title: A Standard interface for Aerial Vehicles
Author: Tully Foote
Status: Deferred
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 16-May-2016
Post-History: 12-Jul-2016, 18-Jan-2018


Abstract
========

This REP is written to provide a common interface for aerial vehicles.
This interface is designed to promote interoperability and reusability of core functionality between diverse aerial vehicles.
By leveraging the interfaces defined in this REP we both tools and libraries can be designed to be reusable between different frameworks and vehicles.
It is expected that aerial vehicles can and will implement additional interfaces in addition to these core interfaces.
When choosing an interface these should be considered the default and only change away from them for a good reason.

These interfaces are designed to be relevant for all types of aerial vehicles whether multi-copter, fixed-wing, hybrid, transitional or other.
Like ground robots, the core abstraction is the same for all vehicles regardless of their method of motivation.

Rationale
=========

There are a lot of developers around the world using ROS on aerial vehicles.
As such there are also many different implementations which are similiar but not exactly compatible.
A short list of existing known bridges and implementations follows:

 - astec_mav_framework [#astec]_
 - autopilot_bridge [#autopilot_bridge]_
 - CRATES [#crates]_
 - dji_sdk_dji2ros [#djisdk]_
 - dji_sdk [#dji_sdk]_
 - hector_quadrotor [#hector]_
 - mav_tools [#mav_tools]_
 - mavlink2ros [#mavlink2ros]_
 - mavros [#mavros]_
 - roscopter [#roscopter]_
 - rospilot [#rospilot]_

Due to a lack of common interfaces the majority of the above packages cannot be used together.
By implementing common interfaces elements of each package can be used in conjunction with elements of a different package.
This will allow much better collaboration between projects and allow a reduction in duplicate efforts to implement the same functionality.

There are also a lot of interfaces already well developed from other domains which can be brought into the aerial vehicle domain.
This REP seeks to also integrate as many of those reusable interfaces as well to provide the greatest compatibilty with those other domains.

Other interface defintions
==========================

There are a lot of messages already defined.
These messages definitions were used to help define this set.

 - DroneKit [#dronekit]_
 - mav_msgs [#mav_msgs]_
 - mavlink [#mavlink]_
 - mavlink2 [#mavlink2]_
 - mavros_msgs [#mavros]_
 - nav_msgs [#nav_msgs]_
 - trajectory_msgs [#trajectory_msgs]_



Reference Abstractions
======================

For this document we will use the following abstractions of the architecture.
These abstractions are used to define the interfaces, however it is not required that a given system implement all the interfaces.
A given system may implement subsets of these interfaces.


Control Abstractions
--------------------

For controlling an aerial vehicle we will use the following terms for the interfaces.

.. raw:: html

  <div class="mermaid">
  graph LR
    na[ ]
    tc[Trajectory Controller]
    ac[Attitude Controller]
    rc[Rate Controller]
    va[Vehicle Abstraction]
    na ==>|Trajectory|tc
    tc ==>|Pose|ac
    ac ==>|Rate|rc
    rc ==>|Acceleration|va

    va -.-> am[Allocation Matrix]
    va -.-> mixer

    am -.-> Actuators
    mixer -.-> Actuators
  </div>

High Level Architecture
-----------------------

A higher level view of the system uses the following abstraction.

.. raw:: html

  <div class="mermaid">
  graph LR
    GCS[Ground Control Station]
    CS[Collision Sensors]
    OS[Odometry Sensors]
    C[Controller]
    L[ ]
    style L fill:#fff,stroke:#ff0,stroke-width:0px;
    L --> CS
    L --> GCS
    L --> OS
    subgraph Generic Planning Framework
    CM[Collision Mapping]
    MSC[Planner e.g.<br>Minimum Snap Trajectory Generator]
    CM ---|Shared State|MSC
    end
    CS -->|Obstacle Observations|CM
    OS -->|Odometry|MSC
    OS -->|Odometry|CM
    OS -->|Odometry|C
    GCS -->|Goals|MSC
    MSC -->|Control Abstraction|C
    %% Links to L
    linkStyle 0 fill:#fff,stroke:#ff0,stroke-width:0px;
    linkStyle 1 fill:#fff,stroke:#ff0,stroke-width:0px;
    linkStyle 2 fill:#fff,stroke:#ff0,stroke-width:0px;
  </div>


Coordinate Frames
=================

It is expected that users of this interface will also follow the coordinate frame conventions layed out in REP 105 [#rep105]_.

Proposed Interfaces
===================

Control Interfaces
------------------

Trajectory Control Interface
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

For sending trajectories in 3D space there already exists a message used for free space planning.
This message used is ``trajectory_msgs/MultiDOFJointTrajectory`` [#multidoftraj]_ and is actively used by planning frameworks already.

This message is not the most straight forward to parse as it has a lot of optional fields which increases the complexity and requires consistent labelling and filling.
The complexity of the message parsing is traded off against supporting a relatively compact representations.

* Datatype: ``trajectory_msgs/MultiDOFJointTrajectory`` [#multidoftraj]_
* Topic: ``command_trajectory``

::

  # The header is used to specify the coordinate frame and the reference time for the trajectory durations
  Header header

  # A representation of a multi-dof joint trajectory (each point is a transformation)
  # Each point along the trajectory will include an array of positions/velocities/accelerations
  # that has the same length as the array of joint names, and has the same order of joints as
  # the joint names array.

  string[] joint_names
  MultiDOFJointTrajectoryPoint[] points

Pose Interface
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

The message to send a goal pose is ``geometry_msgs/PoseStamped`` [#posestamped]_.
This is a very highly used standard message and contains precisely the information needed.

* Datatype: ``geometry_msgs/PoseStamped`` [#posestamped]_
* Topic: ``command_pose``

::

  # A Pose with reference coordinate frame and timestamp
  Header header
  Pose pose

The reference position is the origin of the ``base_link`` as defined in [#REP105]_

Rate Interface
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

The message to send a velocity command is ``geometry_msgs/TwistStamped`` [#twiststamped]_.
This is the standard way to command ROS vehicles.
The datatype is not timestamped or externally referenced as it is not intended to be used in an open loop control system.

* Datatype: ``geometry_msgs/TwistStamped`` [#twiststamped]_
* Topic: ``command_velocity``

::

    std_msgs/Header header
      uint32 seq
      time stamp
      string frame_id
    geometry_msgs/Twist twist
      geometry_msgs/Vector3 linear
        float64 x
        float64 y
        float64 z
      geometry_msgs/Vector3 angular
        float64 x
        float64 y
        float64 z

The command is a body relative set of accelerations in linear and angular space.
This diverges from the common ``geometry_msgs/Twist`` [#twist]_ used by ground robots.
A pure ``Twist`` based inteface could be provided for backwards compatability as well.
It was chosen to diverge here since this is a much more powerful inteface for the vehicles and does not require all commands to be reverse calculated for the instantaneous attitude of the vehicle.


This is replacing ``mav_msgs/AttitudeThrust`` [#attitudethrust]_ and ``mav_msgs/RollPitchYawrateThrust`` [#rpythrust]_.

Acceleration Interface
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,


The message to send a velocity command is ``geometry_msgs/Twist`` [#twiststamped]_.
The datatype is not timestamped or externally referenced as it is not intended to be used in an open loop control system.

* Datatype: ``geometry_msgs/TwistStamped`` [#twiststamped]_
* Topic: ``command_acceleration``

::

    std_msgs/Header header
      uint32 seq
      time stamp
      string frame_id
    geometry_msgs/Twist twist
      geometry_msgs/Vector3 linear
        float64 x
        float64 y
        float64 z
      geometry_msgs/Vector3 angular
        float64 x
        float64 y
        float64 z



The command is a body relative set of accelerations in linear and angular space.
The reference position is the origin of the ``base_link`` as defined in [#REP105]_

This is replacing the ``mav_msgs/RateThrust`` [#ratethrust]_ message for a more standard one with the specific call out of the ``base_link``.

High Level Interfaces
---------------------

Odometry Interface
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

To communicate odometry information the ``nav_msgs/Odometry`` message will be used. [#odometry]_
This is the standard message used throughout ROS systems already, many modules already take advantage of it.
However there are many use cases for aerial vehicles when the estimation of the acceleration is important.
So an additional message will be defined which provides acceleration in addition to position and velocity already defined.
This additional message will be published in parallel.
For backwards compatibility all systems will publish both.

* Datatype: ``nav_msgs/Odometry`` [#odometry]_
* Topic: ``odom``

::

  # This represents an estimate of a position and velocity in free space.
  # The pose in this message should be specified in the coordinate frame given by header.frame_id.
  # The twist in this message should be specified in the coordinate frame given by the child_frame_id
  Header header
  string child_frame_id
  geometry_msgs/PoseWithCovariance pose
  geometry_msgs/TwistWithCovariance twist

* Datatype: ``nav_msgs/OdometryWithAcceleration`` `[proposed]`
* Topic: ``odometry``

::

  # This represents an estimate of a position, velocity, and acceleration in free space.
  # The pose in this message should be specified in the coordinate frame given by header.frame_id.
  # The twist and acceleration in this message should be specified in the coordinate frame given by the child_frame_id
  Header header
  string child_frame_id
  geometry_msgs/PoseWithCovariance pose
  geometry_msgs/TwistWithCovariance twist
  geometry_msgs/TwistWithCovariance acceleration


Goal Interface
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

It is expected that there will be several high level ways to communicate goals which are application specific.
A standard way to communicate goals will also be important following the mavlink protocol we can send the same messages over ROS using the following pair of messages.

* SubDatatype: ``nav_msgs/GlobalPosition`` `[proposed]`
* Topic: ``command_gps_pose``

::

  std_msgs/Header header

  uint8 coordinate_frame
  uint8 FRAME_GLOBAL_INT = 5
  uint8 FRAME_GLOBAL_REL_ALT = 6
  uint8 FRAME_GLOBAL_TERRAIN_ALT = 11

  uint16 type_mask
  uint16 IGNORE_LATITUDE = 1	# Position ignore flags
  uint16 IGNORE_LONGITUDE = 2
  uint16 IGNORE_ALTITUDE = 4
  uint16 IGNORE_VX = 8	# Velocity vector ignore flags
  uint16 IGNORE_VY = 16
  uint16 IGNORE_VZ = 32
  uint16 IGNORE_AFX = 64	# Acceleration/Force vector ignore flags
  uint16 IGNORE_AFY = 128
  uint16 IGNORE_AFZ = 256
  uint16 FORCE = 512	# Force in af vector flag
  uint16 IGNORE_YAW = 1024
  uint16 IGNORE_YAW_RATE = 2048

  float64 latitude
  float64 longitude
  float32 altitude	# in meters, AMSL or above terrain
  geometry_msgs/Twist velocity
  geometry_msgs/Twist acceleration_or_force
  float32 yaw

To send a series of goals a list of GlobalPositions can be used.

* Datatype: ``nav_msgs/GlobalWaypoints`` `[proposed]`
* Topic: ``command_gps_pose``

::

  nav_msgs/GlobalPosition[] waypoints


Currently Unspecified
---------------------

Obstacle Observations
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

The obstacle observations are expected to use common sensor messages.
However since there are a large variety of potential sensors, this interface will not be defined in this REP.
It is recommended to use the common messages such as ``LaserScan``, ``DepthImage``, and ``PointCloud2`` from ``sensor_msgs`` whenever possible. [#sensormsgs]_

Shared State
,,,,,,,,,,,,

The shared state between the collision mapping and motion planning controller is expected to be very specific to the implementation.
As such it is not proposed to be standardized.

Missions
,,,,,,,,

Currently there are quite a few varieties of missions data formats that are available.
The most prominent is the mavlink mission protocol. [#mavlinkmission]_
These missions are heavily used and often customized.
A ROS equivalent could be defined but the current mission protocol is both relatively complicated and only provides relatively simple primative constructs with which to compose a mission.
It is expected that mission planners can dynamically construct lower level controls for the vehicle that can then be executed upon by the vehicle controller.
The simplest of these mission planners would generate a target waypoint for the vehicle to fly to and send a new one when there's a new position to fly to.
A slightly more complex flight mission might send a series of waypoints which the vehicle will follow until the end.
If a change in path is required the mission planner will deliver a whole new set of waypoints for the vehicle to follow.
For more complicated missions the mission planner can generate the lower level trajectories for controlling the vehicles path more specifically, such as when doing an orbit or other more advanced mission operation.
There are a lot more advanced missions that can be run with state machines and higher level logic.
Until there is more development in this area we will not propose a standardized mission profile.

Other Interfaces
================

Battery State
-------------
Aerial vehicles should use the ``sensor_msgs/BatteryState`` message for reporting their battery status. [#batterystate]_
This is a recently standardized message which is much more broadly applicable than aerial vehicles and has already been standardized.

* Datatype: ``sensor_msgs/BatteryState`` [#batterystate]_
* Topic: ``battery_state``


Vehicle Status
--------------
Drones could have different configurations or types as well as define failsafes, engine failures or hardware in the loop setup. These are the fields proposed for this message

* Datatype: ``proposed_aerial_msgs/VehicleStatus`` (proposed)
* Service Name: `status`

::

  uint8 HIL_STATE_OFF = 0
  uint8 HIL_STATE_ON = 1

  uint8 VEHICLE_TYPE_UNKNOWN = 0
  uint8 VEHICLE_TYPE_ROTARY_WING = 1
  uint8 VEHICLE_TYPE_FIXED_WING = 2
  uint8 VEHICLE_TYPE_ROVER = 3
  uint8 VEHICLE_TYPE_VTOL = 4

  std_msgs/Header header

  uint8 system_type     # system type
  bool engine_failure   # Set to true if an engine failure is detected
  bool failsafe         # true if system is in failsafe state
  uint8 hil_state       # current hil state


Flight Modes
------------

Drones have quite a few flight modes. For example the PX4 Flight Modes number between 9 and 12 for different configurations. [#px4flight]_
Many of these different modes are modifying which user inputs are used and/or how they are interpreted.
For working with ROS it is expected that the user inputs will be modulated and recieved through the ROS system and that the system will be in control the whole time including implementing fallback and recovery behaviors.
Without the need for these extra modes we will reduce the state diagram significantly.
The autopilot itself is expected to be in Offboard control mode for most configurations using ROS.
In theory all of the states could be eliminated and the arming, takeoff, landing, and return to land logic could be fully implemented, but we will keep those states which are related to safety system already implemented.

To that end the following modes for ROS flight operations are proposed.

.. raw:: html

  <div class="mermaid">
  graph LR
    DISARMED[Disarmed]
    ARMED[Armed]
    FLYING[Flying]
    LANDED[Landed]
    RTL[Return to Land]
    DISARMED --> |Arm| ARMED
    ARMED --> |Takeoff| FLYING
    FLYING --> |Land| LANDED
    FLYING --> | RTL<br>Lost Link | RTL
    LANDED --> |Auto Disarm| DISARMED
    RTL --> |Disarm| DISARMED
    FLYING --> |Disarm| DISARMED
    RTL --> | Auto Land | LANDED
    %% Links to DISARMED
    linkStyle 5 fill:#fff,stroke:#f00,stroke-width:3px;
    linkStyle 6 fill:#fff,stroke:#f00,stroke-width:3px;
  </div>

Note that the red disarm transitions are potentially unsafe as they could lead to the vehicle falling.

* Datatype: ``mav_msgs/FlightMode`` (proposed)

::

  uint8 FLIGHT_MODE_DISARMED=0
  uint8 FLIGHT_MODE_ARMED=1
  uint8 FLIGHT_MODE_FLYING=2
  uint8 FLIGHT_MODE_LANDED=3
  uint8 FLIGHT_MODE_RTL=4

  uint8 flight_mode # The flight mode indicated


* Datatype: ``mav_msgs/SetFlightMode`` (proposed)
* Service Name: `set_flight_mode`

::

  mav_msgs/FlightMode goal # The desired flight mode
  ---
  mav_msgs/FlightMode result # The resultant state after the attempted transition.
  bool success # True if desired change was executed False otherwise.

Mavlink Equivalents
===================

One of the most common protocols for drones is Mavlink. [#mavlink]_

It is important that we define the minimal set which provides coverage of general flying vehicles.
This type of abstraction allows the greatest level of reusability of components between different systems.
The goal of a standard message set is to define the things that are completely general, and let implementers define their own specializations for their specific systems.

As those specifications become more mature they can also be standardized as optional extensions to the defined interface.
When using ROS messages these extensions will be discoverable and shareable to facilitate converging implementations.

This section will provide a guide of suggested mappings of existing Mavlink messages to existing ROS messages outside the above minimal specification.
This will be useful for users who are familiar with Mavlink or using a system with mavlink and need to bridge between systems.

This is a departure from Mavlink where things needed to be fully defined in the spec or at least allocated out with negotiated message IDs so that messages didn’t collide.
Also the availability of topics allows the use of the same data structures for different purposes.
For example there doesn’t need to be three IMU messages to tell the different IMUs apart.

This list has focused on getting coverage of [#commonxml]_ it has been grouped into basic categories.

Text Status Outputs
-------------------

Code should use the ROS_CONSOLE or RCL status api to report status.
This has infrastructure for enabling and setting verbosity levels at startup and runtime as well as changing them during runtime and has standard messages for remotely monitoring and controlling them.

- ``STATUSTEXT``

ROS Messages in REP 147
-----------------------

For quick reference the following mavlink messages are considered covered in the specification above.

Position reporting
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

There are many position reporting methods defined in Mavlink.
They are all variations on PoseWithCovarianceStamped with different relevant frame_ids.

- ``LOCAL_POSITION_NED_SYSTEM_GLOBAL_O``
- ``LOCAL_POSITION_NED_COV``
- ``GLOBAL_POSITION_INT_COV``
- ``ATTITUDE_QUATERNION_COV``
- ``GLOBAL_POSITION_INT``
- ``LOCAL_POSITION_NED``
- ``ATTITUDE_QUATERNION``
- ``ALTITUDE``

Battery Status
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

Defined above.

- ``BATTERY_STATUS``

Position commands
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

These are all covered in the hierarchy of commands in REP 147

- ``POSITION_TARGET_GLOBAL_INT``
- ``SET_POSITION_TARGET_GLOBAL_INT``
- ``POSITION_TARGET_LOCAL_NED``
- ``SET_POSITION_TARGET_LOCAL_NED``
- ``ATTITUDE_TARGET``
- ``SET_ATTITUDE_TARGET``
- ``MANUAL_SETPOINT``

Generic Command
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

These should be behaviors that then output via the REP’s hierarchy of command topics.
Each node can have logic or parameters to react according to a behavior.
It’s no longer a global state of the system.

- ``COMMAND_ACK``
- ``COMMAND_LONG``
- ``COMMAND_INT``

Generic Sensor Info
-------------------

There are a lot of existing ROS messages in the sensor_msgs package [#sensormsgs]_ that can be immediately reused in drones.
A few examples are as follows.

- ``DISTANCE_SENSOR`` -- ``sensor_msgs/Range`` [#sm_range]_
- ``CAMERA_TRIGGER`` -- ``std_srvs/Trigger`` [#ss_trigger]_
- ``OPTICAL_FLOW_RAD`` --  These could use a new message but I’d want it to be driven by an active user/developer. There might also be potential in existing vision_msgs TODO(tfoote)
- ``VISION_SPEED_ESTIMATE`` -- ``geometry_msgs/TwistWithCovarianceStamped`` on a specific topic.
- ``VISION_POSITION_ESTIMATE`` and GLOBAL_VISION_POSITION_ESTIMATE -- ``geometry_msgs/PoseWithCovarianceStamped`` on a specific topic TODO(tfoote) link

Image Transport
---------------

For transporting images and image streams it is recommended to use the [image_transport system](http://wiki.ros.org/image_transport) from ROS.
It is capable of streaming raw as well as compressed image streams and selecting the mode at runtime.
There is a plugin system to add support for different compressions and transports.

This would cover:

- ``ENCAPSULATED_DATA``
- ``DATA_TRANSMISSION_HANDSHAKE``

Wind Information
----------------

``WIND_COV`` is recommended to be represented by a ``geometry_msgs/TwistWithCovarianceStamped`` on a specific topic.

Candidates for Future Porting
-----------------------------

Barometer
,,,,,,,,,

The absolute measurements can be captured by ``sensor_msgs/FluidPressure`` TODO LINK TODO A barometer message with the relative measurements would be a good extension.

Related mesages are:

- ``RAW_PRESSURE``
- ``SCALED_PRESSURE``
- ``SCALED_PRESSURE2``
- ``SCALED_PRESSURE3``

Custom High Level Summary
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

The message ``HIGH_LATENCY`` is a custom summary message for sending the state out.
It’s optimized for a specific use case with specific hardware.
It can easily be directly ported, but is is recommended be broken down into a few different messages or composed of a few different messages forwarded over the high latency/low bandwidth link instead of defining a new datatype.

Vibration Levels
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,


This is uncaptured but is not documented well enough to define a message and is not a primary flight concern but more of a diagnostic.

- ``VIBRATION``

GPS Messsages
-------------

For GPS messages there already exists a [NavSatFix](http://docs.ros.org/api/sensor_msgs/html/msg/NavSatFix.html) and a [NavSatStatus](http://docs.ros.org/melodic/api/sensor_msgs/html/msg/NavSatStatus.html) which are recommended for general GPS position information and status.

- ``GPS_STATUS``

There are also a bunch of raw and other specific data types that are potentially useful in Mavlink, but are moderately specific to the localization hardware.
As such they would be better ported for specific hardware support packages and not considered fully standardized.

- ``GPS_INPUT``
- ``GPS_RTCM_DATA``
- ``GPS2_RTK``
- ``GPS_RTK``
- ``GPS2_RAW``
- ``GPS_INJECT_DATA``
- ``GPS_GLOBAL_ORIGIN``
- ``SET_GPS_GLOBAL_ORIGIN``
- ``GPS_RAW_INT``

IMU Messages
------------

There are existing IMU messages that should be reused instead of defining new ones.
http://docs.ros.org/melodic/api/sensor_msgs/html/msg/Imu.html
There’s already a [proposal upstream](https://github.com/ros/common_msgs/pull/101) for improvements that we will plan to integrate with upper triangular covariance used in the PX4 stack.

- ``RAW_IMU``
- ``HIGHRES_IMU``
- ``SCALED_IMU``
- ``SCALED_IMU2``
- ``SCALED_IMU3``

Custom Waypoint Logic
---------------------

This is mostly encoding specific messages related to autopilot implementation behaviors.
It is recommended to be caputred by a generic waypoint communicated on a specific topic or service instead of as a dedicated message.

- ``SET_HOME_POSITION``
- ``HOME_POSITION``
- ``LANDING_TARGET``
- ``FOLLOW_TARGET``

Parameters
----------

These messages can be replaced by using parameters on the nodes to set these values.

- ``MESSAGE_INTERVAL``
- ``SERIAL_CONTROL``

ROS provides parameters set and get services which can replace the below messages.

- ``PARAM_SET``
- ``PARAM_VALUE``
- ``PARAM_REQUEST_LIST``
- ``PARAM_REQUEST_READ``

Data Logging
------------

Logging and playback are recommended to be managed by rosbag.
There are APIs already implemented for controlling recording remotely.
There are not currently apis for downloading the data but that is likely better done using a standard file transfer mechanism than through a runtime behavior.

Related mavlink messages include:

- ``LOG_REQUEST_END``
- ``LOG_ERASE``
- ``LOG_DATA``
- ``LOG_REQUEST_DATA``
- ``LOG_ENTRY``
- ``LOG_REQUEST_LIST``
- ``FILE_TRANSFER_PROTOCOL``

Time
----

It is recommended to use the stadard ROS time abstraction.

- ``SYSTEM_TIME``

Connectivity Checks
-------------------

There are many capabilities of DDS to check for livelyness and heartbeats built into the communication layer that can be leveraged.
Also the ``bond`` libraries from ROS1 have heartbeat logic.

- ``PING``
- ``HEARTBEAT``

It is recommended that acknowlegement of message receipt be embedded into the communication layer using the reilable transport and callbacks if the message does not arrive.

- ``COMMAND_ACK``

Security
--------

ROS2 using DDS's security extensions can provide cryptographically secure fine grained authentication, access control, and encryption.
It is recommended to use that toolchain for security.

- ``AUTH_KEY``
- ``CHANGE_OPERATOR_CONTROL``
- ``CHANGE_OPERATOR_CONTROL_ACK``

Skipped in the analysis
-----------------------

- ``RESOURCE_REQUEST`` not flight related
- ``V2_EXTENSION`` not clearly documented

Debugging Outputs
-----------------

These are generic data types that are defined to let the developer send basically anything over the network.
Instead of shoehorning data into these few generic datatypes on a ROS based system, it is recommended that the developer define their own debug messages and send them along capturing exactly what they want with the appropriate datatypes or structures.

- ``DEBUG``
- ``NAMED_VALUE_INT``
- ``NAMED_VALUE_FLOAT``
- ``DEBUG_VECT``
- ``MEMORY_VECT``


Messages that are not generic
-----------------------------

HITL Specific Messages
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

These are simulation specific messages that are specific to integrating the autopilot with simulation.
The current messages are also specific to the autopilot implementation and not generic enough to necessarily use alternative autopilots.

- ``HIL_STATE_QUATERNION``
- ``HIL_OPTICAL_FLOW``
- ``HIL_GPS``
- ``HIL_SENSOR``
- ``SIM_STATE``
- ``HIL_ACTUATOR_CONTROLS``
- ``HIL_RC_INPUTS_RAW``
- ``HIL_CONTROLS``

Hardware Specific Info
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

These mavlink messages are coupled directly to hardware and are not abstracted at an optimal level to be considered universal for all vehicles.

- ``POWER_STATUS``
- ``TIMESYNC``
- ``RADIO_STATUS``

Mocap Specific
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

These mocap systems can use generic position reports with covariance on a specific topic instead of needing a custom datatype.

- ``ATT_POSE_MOCAP``
- ``VICON_POSITION_ESTIMATE``

Low Level Control
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

This is too low level for a good abstraction, it’s not valid on all types of hardware.

- ``SET_ACTUATOR_CONTROL_TARGET``
- ``ACTUATOR_CONTROL_TARGET``
- ``MANUAL_CONTROL``
- ``RC_CHANNELS_OVERRIDE`` Also overriding user commands
- ``RC_CHANNELS``
- ``PARAM_MAP_RC``

Low Level Feedback
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

- ``SERVO_OUTPUT_RAW``
- ``RC_CHANNELS_RAW``
- ``RC_CHANNELS_SCALED``

Autopilot Version information
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

This can be captured as a parameter.

- ``AUTOPILOT_VERSION``

Display specific message
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

This is a specific message for displaying into a HUD, it’s aggregating and duplicating existing data that doesn’t need to be generally broadcast separately.

- ``VFR_HUD``

Component specific debug Messages
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

This is a debug/status message that’s specific to the current estimator desing. The parameters are not right for a particle filter based estimator or another style of implementation.

- ``ESTIMATOR_STATUS``

These are messages that can share the state of controllers but is only valid for specific controllers and thus not a good candidate for standardization.

- ``CONTROL_SYSTEM_STATE``
- ``NAV_CONTROLLER_OUTPUT``

Mission Management
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

The current mission definitions are a basic set of primative behaviors.
They are a significant subset of the capabilities of vehicles and those primatives should not be built into a next generation abstraction for drones.
However that’s not to say that the mission concept should be eliminated.
Going forward the current mission structure is easy for operators to think about and that should be retained, but instead of considering the missions a standard interface for the drones.
They should be parsed and simply generate the REP 147 compliant trajectory that the drone can follow.
In the future this will allow the implementation to extend the mission waypoints types and add more complex logic into the missions and remain compatible with all drones.

- ``MISSION_ITEM_INT``
- ``MISSION_REQUEST_INT``
- ``MISSION_ACK``
- ``MISSION_ITEM_REACHED``
- ``MISSION_CLEAR_ALL``
- ``MISSION_COUNT``
- ``MISSION_REQUEST_LIST``
- ``MISSION_CURRENT``
- ``MISSION_SET_CURRENT``
- ``MISSION_REQUEST``
- ``MISSION_ITEM``
- ``MISSION_WRITE_PARTIAL_LIST``
- ``MISSION_REQUEST_PARTIAL_LIST``

VTOL Specific State
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

This is a very hardware specific message that was added for a specific hardware type.
This is a good example of an extension that was required because the standard was not abstract enough.

- ``EXTENDED_SYS_STATE``

Collision Information
,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,

These collision messages are customized to a specific implementation and do no generalize.

- ``COLLISION``
- ``ADSB_VEHICLE``
- ``TERRAIN_DATA``
- ``TERRAIN_CHECK``
- ``TERRAIN_REPORT``
- ``SAFETY_ALLOWED_AREA``
- ``SAFETY_SET_ALLOWED_AREA``


Summary
=======

Existing interfaces
-------------------

 - Battery State via ``sensor_msgs/BatteryState`` [#batterystate]_
 - Trajectory via ``trajectory_msgs/MultiDOFJointTrajectory`` [#multidoftraj]_
 - Rates via ``mav_msgs/RollPitchYawrateThrust`` [#rpythrust]_ or ``mav_msgs/AttitudeThrust`` [#attitudethrust]_
 - Accelerations via ``mav_msgs/RateThrust``  [#ratethrust]_
 - Obstacle information from common ``sensor_msgs`` [#sensormsgs]_
 - Odometry via``nav_msgs/Odometry`` [#odometry]_

Proposed New Interfaces

 - Extended Odometry via proposed ``nav_msgs/OdometryWithAcceleration`` [propoised]

References
==========

.. [#astec] astec_mav_framework
   (http://wiki.ros.org/asctec_mav_framework)

.. [#mavlink2ros] mavlink2ros
   (https://github.com/posilva/mav2rosgenerator)

.. [#mavros] mavros
   (http://wiki.ros.org/mavros)

.. [#roscopter] roscopter
   (https://code.google.com/p/roscopter/)

.. [#crates] CRATES
   (https://bitbucket.org/asymingt/crates)

.. [#rospilot] rospilot
   (http://wiki.ros.org/rospilot)

.. [#hector] hector_quadrotor
   (http://wiki.ros.org/hector_quadrotor)

.. [#autopilot_bridge] autopilot_bridge
   (https://github.com/mikeclement/autopilot_bridge)

.. [#mav_tools] mav_tools
   (http://wiki.ros.org/mav_tools)

.. [#djisdk] dji_sdk_dji2ros
   (http://www.ros.org/browse/details.php?distro=indigo&name=dji_sdk_dji2mav)

.. [#dji_sdk] dji_sdk
   (http://wiki.ros.org/dji_sdk)

.. [#batterystate] sensor_msgs/BatteryState
   (http://docs.ros.org/api/sensor_msgs/html/msg/BatteryState.html)

.. [#multidoftraj]
   (http://docs.ros.org/api/trajectory_msgs/html/msg/MultiDOFJointTrajectory.html)

.. [#posestamped]
   (http://docs.ros.org/api/geometry_msgs/html/msg/PoseStamped.html)

.. [#sensormsgs]
   (http://wiki.ros.org/sensor_msgs)

.. [#nav_msgs] nav_msgs
   (http://wiki.ros.org/nav_msgs)

.. [#trajectory_msgs] trajectory_msgs
   (http://wiki.ros.org/trajectory_msgs)

.. [#dronekit] DroneKit
   (http://dronekit.io/)

.. [#mav_msgs] mav_msgs
   (http://wiki.ros.org/mav_msgs)

.. [#mavlink] Mavlink
   (https://mavlink.io/en/)

.. [#mavlink2] Mavlink2
   (https://github.com/diydrones/mavlink/blob/mavlink2-wip/doc/MAVLink2.md)

.. [#odometry] odometry
   (http://www.ros.org/doc/api/nav_msgs/html/msg/Odometry.html)

.. [#ratethrust] mav_msgs/RateThrust
   (http://docs.ros.org/jade/api/mav_msgs/html/msg/RateThrust.html)

.. [#attitudethrust] mav_msgs/AttitudeThrust
   (http://docs.ros.org/jade/api/mav_msgs/html/msg/AttitudeThrust.html)

.. [#rpythrust] mav_msgs/RollPitchYawrateThrust
   (http://docs.ros.org/indigo/api/mav_msgs/html/msg/RollPitchYawrateThrust.html)

.. [#twist] geometry_msgs/Twist
   (http://docs.ros.org/api/geometry_msgs/html/msg/Twist.html)

.. [#twiststamped] geometry_msgs/TwistStamped
  (http://docs.ros.org/api/geometry_msgs/html/msg/TwistStamped.html)

.. [#rep105] REP 105: Coordinate Frames for Mobile Platforms
   (http://www.ros.org/reps/rep-0105.html)

.. [#px4flight] PX4 Flight Modes
   (https://dev.px4.io/en/concept/flight_modes.html)

.. [#mavlinkmission] Mavlink Mission protocol
   (https://mavlink.io/en/services/mission.html)

.. [#commonxml] Mavlink Common.xml
   (https://mavlink.io/en/messages/common.html)

.. [#sm_range] ``sensor_msgs/Range``
   (http://docs.ros.org/melodic/api/sensor_msgs/html/msg/Range.html)

.. [#ss_trigger] ``std_srvs/Trigger``
   (http://docs.ros.org/melodic/api/std_srvs/html/srv/Trigger.html)


Copyright
=========

This document has been placed in the public domain.



..
   Local Variables:
   mode: indented-text
   indent-tabs-mode: nil
   sentence-end-double-space: t
   fill-column: 70
   coding: utf-8
   End:
